URL: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/101264378/
Page Title: Dr. Jaya Thakur vs Government Of India on 30 January, 2026
Court: 
Case: Dr. Jaya Thakur vs Government Of India on 30 January, 2026
================================================================================


=== Issue (47) ===

[p] J.B. PARDIWALA & R. MAHADEVAN, JJ.:

[p] 1Standard Operating Procedure for Sustaining Water, Sanitation and Hygiene in Schools,
Ministry of Education, Government of India.

[p] 7.    The present writ petition seeks to address this issue of lack of
          menstrual hygiene management in schools across the country.
          The problem identified is two-fold, first, absenteeism; and
          secondly, completely dropping out of school due to lack of MHM
          measures.2

[p] III. SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE PARTIES
          i. Submissions on behalf of the Union of India - Respondent
             Nos. 1 to 3 respectively

[p] 11. The policy intends to provide access to safe and low-cost
       menstrual hygiene products, environmentally safe disposal
       methods for menstrual waste, promote clean and gender-
       segregated sanitation facilities, and incorporate menstrual
       hygiene education into school curriculum to raise awareness
       and reduce stigma.

[p] ensure safe disposal of sanitary napkins.

[p] Capacity building and training of teachers,
                                      field level health workers – auxillary nurseW.P. (C) No. 1000 of 2022                                         Page 7 of 126midwives, ASHA workers and Anganwadi
                                       workers.

[p] a. Installation of sanitary napkin vending
                                           machine;

[p] menstrual hygiene awareness. Installation
                                       of incinerators by utilizing grants.

[p] 13. The following States have undertaken a number of policy
       initiatives    and      programmes         which       are     summarized
       hereinbelow:-

[p] Awareness  One-day training organized to make
                                       handmade sanitary pads. Schools are
                                       encouraged to keep napkins in
                                       collaboration through NGOs.

[p] State initiative     Toilets  Maintenance           through     annual
                                       maintenance grant.

[p] State initiative    Disposal  Incinerators and deep burial methods.

[p] Respondent no. 8 - Andhra Pradesh
         YSR Swechha      Sanitary   Monthly entitlements of 10 free-

[p] napkins    biodegradable pads per girl student.

[p] District level monitoring teams are
                                     constituted to monitor the distribution.

[p] Family Doctor    Awareness   Periodical visits to provide clinical
          Programme                  counselling and referral services to
                                     adolescent girls and family.

[p] incinerators, deep burial, pit disposal,
                                       manual incinerators chulha.

[p] Toilets   vending machines and incinerators
                                       installed.

[p] Samagra          Sanitary   Installation of sanitary vending machine
           Shiksha          napkins    along with incinerators.

[p] Respondent no. 24 - Punjab
           Education         Sanitary  Free sanitary napkins to all girls in
          Development        napkins   standards VI-XII. Installation of vending
         Secondary-42                  machines and incinerators.

[p] State initiative   Awareness  ASHA workers promote use and
                                       distribution of sanitary napkins.

[p] Karyakram,
            SAATHI
             State             Toilets    Toilets under construction.

[p] Education
             Dept.
                                      Union Territory
                            Respondent no. 39 - Leh & Ladakh
            Samagra           Sanitary    Installation of sanitary pad vending
            Shiksha           napkins     machine and incinerators. Distributed
            Abhiyan                       pads to students. Building separate
                                          toilets for girls.

[p] State initiative    Awareness    Encouraged girls to use menstrual cups.
            with NGO
          Adolescent &       Awareness    By MHM experts on menstruation,
          Self Defence                    hygiene for girls as well as boys.
           Programme

[p] 15. Undoubtedly,          there   is   no   dearth   of   policies,   schemes,
       programmes aimed at addressing the issue. However, what
       seems to be lacking is effective and consistent implementation.

[p] IV. ISSUES FOR CONSIDERATION

[p] 16. Having heard the learned counsel appearing for the parties and
       having gone through the materials placed on record, the
       following questions fall for our consideration:-

[p] 41. Justice MARSHALL, concurring.

[blockquote] For the convenience of exposition, this judgment is divided into the
following parts:-

[blockquote] INDEX
I. THE CONTEXT ............................................................................ 3
II. THE BASICS .............................................................................. 4
III. SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE PARTIES........................... 6
  i. Submissions on behalf of the Union of India - Respondent Nos. 1 to 3
  respectively ................................................................................... 6
  ii. Submissions on behalf of the States - Respondent Nos. 4 to 39
  respectively ................................................................................... 8
IV. ISSUES FOR CONSIDERATION ............................................... 13
V. ANALYSIS ................................................................................ 14
  A. The right to access education: A fundamental human right . 14
     i. Education - an essential human right in the International Human
     Rights Law framework ................................................................... 16
     ii. Judicial recognition of education as a human right .................... 19
  B. Substantive approach to right to equality in education underArticle 14of the Constitution ................................................... 30
     i. Menstruation as a barrier to the right to access education ........... 33
       a. Intersectionality of disability, gender, and access to education ..... 39
  C. The right to dignified menstrual health a part ofArticle 21 .45
     i. The right to human dignity as a concomitant of the right to life ... 45
     ii. The right to privacy and decisional autonomy ............................. 51
     iii. The right to menstrual health as a facet of the right to life ......... 57
  D. The right to participation and the equality of opportunity
  respectively as constitutional guarantees underArticle 14 ...... 72i. Lack of menstrual hygiene measures as a barrier in exercising the
     right to participate in school .......................................................... 73W.P. (C) No. 1000 of 2022                                                       Page 1 of 126ii. Lack of menstrual hygiene management measures impede the
    equality of opportunity .................................................................. 80
       a. Accessibility of menstrual hygiene management measures – a step
       towards Social Justice ..................................................................... 84
  E. The fundamental right to education underArticle 21A ........ 89i. Right to free and compulsory education under theRTE Act......... 96
       a. Management of menstrual hygiene as a financial barrier underSection 3of the RTE Act .................................................................. 99
       b. Menstrual management measures as mandatory “norms and
       standards” for schools underSection 19of the RTE Act ................. 104
  F. Role of Men in Menstruation .............................................. 115
VI. CONCLUSION ........................................................................ 118
VII. DIRECTIONS ....................................................................... 120W.P. (C) No. 1000 of 2022                                                        Page 2 of 126“A period should end a sentence – not a girl’s
             education.”

[blockquote] 1.   We are tempted to preface our judgment with the words of
       Melissa Berton, an American educator, social activist, and
       producer. The statement articulated above resonate with an
       undiminishing force in the present petition as well. The issues
       that have unfolded before us echo the very same judicial
       disquiet. Even with the passage of time, the challenges that
       beset a girl child’s education persist in much the same form.

[blockquote] I. THE CONTEXT

[blockquote] 2.   The petitioner, who is a social worker, has filed the present
       petition underArticle 32of the Constitution in public interest
       seeking appropriate directions to the respondents – the Union of
       India, the States and Union Territories respectively to ensure
       providing of (i) free sanitary pads to every female child studying
       between classes 6 & 12; and (ii) a separate toilet for females in
       all government aided and residential schools. Apart from this,
       certain other consequential reliefs have also been sought for in
       public interest including the maintenance of toilets and the
       spread of awareness programmes. The prayer in the petition
       reads thus:-

[blockquote] “a. issue a writ order or directions in the nature of
             Mandamus to the Respondents to provide the free
             sanitary pads to girl child who are studying from 6th to
             12th class and;

[blockquote] b. issue a writ order or directions in the nature of
             Mandamus to the Respondents to provide the separate
             girl toilet in all Government, Aided and residential
             schools;

[blockquote] c. issue a writ order or directions in the nature of
               Mandamus to the Respondents to provide one cleaner
               in all Government, Aided and residential schools to
               clean the toilets and;

[blockquote] d. issue a writ order or directions in the nature of
               Mandamus to the Respondents to provide three-stage
               awareness programme i.e. Firstly, the spreading of
               awareness about menstrual health and unboxing the
               taboos that surround it; Secondly, providing adequate
               sanitation facilities and subsidized or free sanitary
               products to women and young students, especially in
               disadvantaged areas; Thirdly, to ensure an efficient
               and sanitary manner of menstrual waste disposal and;
               e. pass such other or further order/s as this Hon’ble
               Court may deem it fit in the facts and circumstances of
               this case.”


       II. THE BASICS

[blockquote] 3.   Menstruation refers to the regular discharge of blood and
       mucosal tissue from the inner lining of the uterus through the
       cervix, which passes out of the body through the vagina at
       approximately monthly intervals. It occurs when the egg
       released during ovulation is not fertilized, leading to the
       breakdown and shedding of the uterine lining. Menarche (the
       first menstrual period) occurs after the onset of pubertal growth.
       The average age of a female at the time of menarche is between
       8 and 15 years, and it usually occurs at intervals of about 28
       days.

[blockquote] 4.   The Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation in the National
       Guidelines     for   Menstrual   Hygiene    Management      defines
       menstrual hygiene management (hereinafter referred to asW.P. (C) No. 1000 of 2022                                   Page 4 of 126“MHM”)      as,   “(i) articulation, awareness, information and
         confidence to manage menstruation with safety and dignity using
         safe hygienic materials together with (ii) adequate water and
         agents and spaces for washing and bathing with soap and (iii)
         disposal of used menstrual absorbents with privacy and dignity.”
         Further, water, sanitation and hygiene (hereinafter referred to
         as “WASH”) facilities include clean water, sex-separated
         washrooms, handwashing facilities and MHM. 1

[blockquote] 5.   According to the 2012 Joint Monitoring Programme of the World
         Health Organization, MHM is defined as thus;

[blockquote] a. Whether unavailability of gender-segregated toilets and non-

[blockquote] access to menstrual absorbents could be said to be in
          violation of the right to equality for adolescent girl students
          underArticle 14of the Constitution?

[blockquote] b. Whether the right to dignified menstrual health could be said
          to be part ofArticle 21of the Constitution?

[blockquote] c. Whether unavailability of gender-segregated toilets and non-
          access to menstrual absorbents could be said to be in
          violation of the right of participation and equality of
          opportunity as constitutional guarantees enshrined underArticle 14of the Constitution?

[blockquote] d. Whether unavailability of gender-segregated toilets and non-
          access to menstrual absorbents could be said to be in
          violation of the right to education underArticle 21A, and the
          right to free and compulsory education under theRight of
          Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act, 2009?

[blockquote] V. ANALYSIS

       A. The right to access education: A fundamental human
           right


=== Fact (6) ===

[p] “Women and adolescent girls are using a clean
                menstrual management material to absorb or collect
                menstrual blood, that can be changed in privacy as
                often as necessary, using soap and water for washing
                the body as required, and having access to safe and
                convenient facilities to dispose of used menstrual
                management materials. They understand the basic
                facts linked to the menstrual cycle and how to manage
                it with dignity and without discomfort or fear.”

[p] 12. In the aforesaid context, the respondent nos. 1 to 3 have
       undertaken a number of policy initiatives and programmes
       which are summarized hereinbelow:-

[p] Adolescent girls, boys, teachers, officials
                                       at district level trained on MHM.

[p] School Health   Awareness   Teachers (Health Ambassadors) trained
          & Wellness                 to create awareness on menstrual
          Programme                  hygiene and safe disposal of napkins.
        Peer Education   Awareness   Peer educators trained to create
          Programme                  awareness amongst adolescent girls.
          Mana Badi        Toilets   Provides funds for construction and
          Nadu-Nedu                  retrofitting of toilets with regular water
                                     supply and other infrastructure.

[p] 14. At the same time, the States of Uttar Pradesh, Chhattisgarh,
       Goa, Haryana, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Odisha, Rajasthan,
       Sikkim, Tripura, respectively, and the Union Territories of Delhi,
       Lakshadweep, Daman & Diu, Dadra & Nagar Haveli, Andaman
       & Nicobar Islands, Puducherry, Chandigarh, and Jammu &
       Kashmir respectively have found it convenient to not file their
       affidavits.

[p] 27. In addition to the pivotal role of education in
             sustaining our political and cultural heritage, denial of
             education to some isolated group of children poses an
             affront to one of the goals of the Equal Protection Clause
             : the abolition of governmental barriers presenting
             unreasonable obstacles to advancement on the basis of
             individual merit. Paradoxically, by depriving the
             children of any disfavored group of an education, weW.P. (C) No. 1000 of 2022                                  Page 21 of 126foreclose the means by which that group might raise
             the level of esteem in which it is held by the majority.
             But more directly, "education prepares individuals to be
             self-reliant    and     self-sufficient   participants     in
             society." Wisconsin v. Yoder, supra, 406 U.S., at 221,
             92 S.Ct., at 1536. Illiteracy is an enduring disability.
             The inability to read and write will handicap the
             individual deprived of a basic education each and
             every day of his life. The inestimable toll of that
             deprivation on the social economic, intellectual, and
             psychological well-being of the individual, and the
             obstacle it poses to individual achievement, make it
             most difficult to reconcile the cost or the principle of a
             status-based denial of basic education with the
             framework of equality embodied in the Equal Protection
             Clause. [ Because the State does not afford noncitizens
             the right to vote, and may bar noncitizens from
             participating in activities at the heart of its political
             community, appellants argue that denial of a basic
             education to these children is of less significance than
             the denial to some other group. Whatever the current
             status of these children, the courts below concluded
             that many will remain here permanently and that some
             indeterminate number will eventually become citizens.
             The fact that many will not is not decisive, even with
             respect to the importance of education to participation
             in core political institutions. "[T]he benefits of education
             are not reserved to those whose productive utilization
             of them is a certainty . . . ." 458 F.Supp., at 581, n. 14.
             In addition, although a noncitizen "may be barred from
             full involvement in the political arena, he may play a
             role perhaps even a leadership role—in other areas of
             import to the community." Nyquist v. Mauclet, 432 U.S.
             1,12, 97 S.Ct. 2120, 2126, 53 L.Ed.2d 63 (1977).
             Moreover, the significance of education to our society is
             not limited to its political and cultural fruits. The public
             schools are an important socializing institution,
             imparting those shared values through which social
             order and stability are maintained.][…]
                                          xxx


=== Precedent Analysis (198) ===

[p] 6.   In the aforesaid context, we may discuss what menstrual
         poverty or period poverty means. Menstrual poverty, also known
         as period poverty, refers to the financial burden and obstacles
         that women face in affording menstrual hygiene, or sanitary
         products because they are unable to maintain such expenditure.
         It extends beyond the lack of sanitary products and includes
         inadequate WASH facilities.

[p] 18. A child’s identity, knowledge, values, and skills are largely
       formed through social relationships. In other words, active
       participation in community life strengthens their ability to relate
       to others, promotes inclusivity and harmonious social relations,
       and facilitates learning through experiences and interactions. To
       put it briefly, to be educated is to be empowered.

[p] 20. In the aforesaid context, absence of education limits a girl child’s
       opportunities for participation and representation in society,
       restricts her from challenging social hierarchies, and impedes
       her growth and development. A girl child is often burdened withW.P. (C) No. 1000 of 2022                                 Page 15 of 126the weight of social prejudice, stereotypes, and structural
          oppression that are foisted upon her from an early age.
          Education serves as a counterweight to these factors by
          equipping her with knowledge and awareness. In its absence,
          inequality is not merely sustained but normalized.

[p] 6Vishaka v. State of Rajasthan, (1997) 6 SCC 241;Vellore Citizens Welfare Forum v. Union of

India, (1996) 5 SCC 647;Apparel Export Promotion Council v. A.K. Chopra, (1999) 1 SCC 759.

[p] 30. In Plyler v. J R Doe Texas, reported in 1982 SCC OnLine US
       SC 118, the issue before the Supreme Court of the United States
       was whether free public education could be denied to
       undocumented      school-age    children.   Although    access    to
       education was not a constitutional guarantee yet the Court held
       that the State cannot prevent children from attending public
       schools unless a substantial state interest is involved. While
       underscoring the importance of education, it observed that
       “children denied an education are placed at a permanent and
       insurmountable competitive disadvantage, for an uneducated
       child is denied even the opportunity to achieve”. The relevant
       observations read thus:-

[p] indistinguishable from other forms of social welfare
             legislation. Both the importance of education in
             maintaining our basic institutions, and the lastingW.P. (C) No. 1000 of 2022                                 Page 20 of 126impact of its deprivation on the life of the child, mark
             the distinction. The "American people have always
             regarded education and [the] acquisition of knowledge
             as matters of supreme importance." Meyer v. Nebraska,
             262 U.S. 390, 400, 43 S.Ct. 625, 627, 67 L.Ed. 1042
             (1923). We have recognized "the public schools as a
             most vital civic institution for the preservation of a
             democratic system of government," Abington School
             District v. Schempp, 374 U.S. 203, 230, 83 S.Ct. 1560,
             1575, 10 L.Ed.2d 844 (1963) (BRENNAN, J.,
             concurring), and as the primary vehicle for transmitting
             "the values on which our society rests." Ambach v.
             Norwick, 441 U.S. 68, 76, 99 S.Ct. 1589, 1594, 60
             L.Ed.2d 49 (1979). "[A]s . . . pointed out early in our
             history, . . . some degree of education is necessary to
             prepare citizens to participate effectively and
             intelligently in our open political system if we are to
             preserve freedom and independence." Wisconsin v.
             Yoder, 406 U.S. 205, 221, 92 S.Ct. 1526, 1536, 32
             L.Ed.2d 15 (1972). And these historic "perceptions of
             the public schools as inculcating fundamental values
             necessary to the maintenance of a democratic political
             system have been confirmed by the observations of
             social scientists." Ambach v. Norwick, supra, 411 U.S.,
             at 77, 99 S.Ct., at 1594. In addition, education provides
             the basic tools by which individuals might lead
             economically productive lives to the benefit of us all. In
             sum, education has a fundamental role in maintaining
             the fabric of our society. We cannot ignore the
             significant social costs borne by our Nation when select
             groups are denied the means to absorb the values and
             skills upon which our social order rests.

[p] 31.InBandhua Mukti Morcha v. Union of India, reported in
       (1984) 3 SCC 161, a three Judge Bench of this Court held that
       the right to live with dignity underArticle 21is inspired by the
       Directive Principles of State Policy which includes, inter alia,
       educational facilities.

[p] 32. We may also refer to the decision inMohini Jain (Miss) v. State
       of Karnataka, reported in (1992) 3 SCC 666, wherein this
       Court held that the right to education forms part of the broaderW.P. (C) No. 1000 of 2022                                  Page 23 of 126framework of the right to life and human dignity underArticle
       21of the Constitution. As the right to life includes the right to
       live with dignity, such dignity cannot be realized without access
       to education. While recognizing that denial of education directly
       impacts the exercise of fundamental rights, the Court observed
       that social justice cannot be achieved in the absence of
       education. It observed that education is foundational to the
       realization   of   other   fundamental      rights.    The    relevant
       observations read thus:-

[p] While holding that the government has a positive obligation to
        provide access to schools in fulfilling the right to basic
        education, the other non-State actors have a negative obligation
        not to infringe that right under the Constitution. The Court held
        that any limitation on the right to education must be reasonable
        and justifiable. The relevant observations read thus:-

[p] 47. In such circumstances referred to above, differential treatment
         may be indispensable to achieve equality in practice. As has
         been aptly observed by Amartya Sen, “Equal consideration for all
         may     demand       very    unequal      treatment     in   favour    of    the
         disadvantaged.”8 As a result, unequal treatment may be
         constitutionally permissible when it is directed towards securing
         equal outcomes.9 In other words, substantive equality focuses
         on the extent to which an individual is able to meaningfully
         exercise choices, rather than merely possessing a formal right to
         do so. It recognizes that access to opportunities shall not be
         constrained by social, economic, or physical factors.

[p] 49. Similarly, the Clean India: Clean Schools Handbook reported
         that although the number of schools providing drinking water
         and toilets have increased yet poor maintenance has left them


8 Amartya Sen, Inequality Reexamined 1 (Harvard University Press, Cambridge, 1992).
9Indra Sawhney v. Union of India, 1992 Supp (3) SCC 217.
10 Shantanu Sharma, Devika Mehra, et.al., “Menstrual Hygiene Preparedness Among Schools

in India: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis of System- and Policy-Level Actions” 17
International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health 647 (2020).

[p] 54. The right to education as a human right does not merely demand
       parity between genders but further requires equality of
       opportunity in the enjoyment of that right for all. Inaccessibility
       of MHM measures perpetuates a systemic exclusion and
       discrimination that impacts the admission or continuation of
       girl children in school.

[p] 55. The observations of this Court inJoseph Shine v. Union of
       India, reported in (2019) 3 SCC 39, succinctly capture the
       understanding of the substantive approach to equality. It held
       that substantive equality is aimed at eliminating all sorts of
       discrimination that undermine social, economic, and political
       participation in society. It was further held thatArticle 15(3)ofW.P. (C) No. 1000 of 2022                                 Page 35 of 126the Constitution is intended to bring out substantive equality by
       remedying the disadvantage. It reads thus:-

[p] 56. By yet another Constitution Bench of this Court in Janhit
       Abhiyan v. Union of India (EWS Reservation), reported in
       (2023) 5 SCC 1, it was held that when substantive equality is
       asserted as a constitutional mandate, the State is tasked to
       place the concerned individuals on an equal footing. This Court,
       in so many words, held that substantive equality can take
       various forms, as per the requirements of the disadvantaged
       person or group. It was also observed that social justice cannot
       be achieved without substantive equality which means taking
       affirmative actions. The relevant observations read thus:-

[p] and reservation is recognised as one such affirmative
             action, which is permissible under the Constitution;
             and its operation is defined by a large number of
             decisions of this Court, running up to the detailed
             expositions     inJaishri    Patil [Jaishri Laxmanrao
             Patil v. State of Maharashtra, (2021) 8 SCC 1] .”

                                                (Emphasis supplied)

[p] 57. We may refer with profit the decision in Gaurav Kumar v.

[p] Union of India, reported in (2025) 1 SCC 641, wherein one of
       us, J.B. Pardiwala, J., was a part of the Bench, this Court
       reiterated that the substantive approach to equality aims to
       eliminate individual, institutional, and systemic discrimination
       against the disadvantaged. To put it briefly, substantive equality
       can be achieved through affirmative actions aimed towards
       eliminating discriminatory factors.

[p] 58. Recently, inJane Kaushik v. Union of India, reported in
       (2026) 1 SCC 336, this Bench held that redressal of a
       disadvantage cannot be devoid of an understanding of the otherW.P. (C) No. 1000 of 2022                                  Page 38 of 126impediments that an individual may face on account of other
       identity markers that may cause such an individual to be
       stigmatized and marginalized. The principle of reasonable
       accommodation was put into application as a means for
       achieving substantive equality.

[p] 59. The responsibility of the State is further heightened in the case
       of a child with disability, as the intersection of disability with
       gender    compounds       the     disadvantage    faced     during
       menstruation. In case of children with disabilities, accessibility
       of washrooms is even more essential for inclusion and for
       enabling meaningful participation in school. Needless to say, the
       absence of such accessibility results in exclusion from education
       and reinforces the social and economic marginalization.

[p] 60.InRajiv Raturi v. Union of India, reported in (2024) 16 SCC
       654, wherein one of us, J. B. Pardiwala, J., was a part of the
       Bench, held that the right to accessibility is an integral part of
       the existing human right framework, more particularly, ofArticles 14, 19, and21respectively. It was observed that
       accessibility enables the exercise of other rights, one of which
       forms part of the right to live a meaningful life underArticle 21.TheCourt further heldthat to enable such a right the State is
       required to implement accessibility measures proactively. The
       relevant observations read thus:-

[p] This Court observed: (SCC p. 426, para 12)
                 “12. The vitality of the issue of “accessibility” vis-à-
                 vis visually disabled person's right to life can be
                 gauged clearly by the [Supreme] Court's judgment
                 inState of H.P. v. Umed Ram Sharma [State of
                 H.P.v. Umed Ram Sharma, (1986) 2 SCC 68] where
                 the right to life underArticle 21has been held broad
                 enough to incorporate the right to accessibility.”

[p] 27. The inclusion of accessibility within the
             fundamental rights framework ensures that PWDs are
             entitled to full participation in society underArticles 14,
             19and21of the Constitution.Article 14upholds equal
             access to spaces, services, and information;Article 19guarantees the freedom to move and express oneself;
             andArticle 21ensures the right to live with dignity.
             Together, these provisions guarantee not only formal
             equality but also substantive equality, which requires
             the State to take positive steps to ensure thatW.P. (C) No. 1000 of 2022                                    Page 40 of 126individuals can enjoy their rights fully, irrespective of
               disabilities. This Court in a plethora of judgments has
               repeatedly recognised that the right to dignity and the
               right to a meaningful life underArticle 21necessitate
               conditions that enable PWDs to enjoy the same
               freedoms and choices as others. [ SeeJeeja Ghosh v.
               Union of India, (2016) 7 SCC 761 : (2016) 3 SCC (Civ)
               551 : 2016 INSC 412;Rajive Raturi v. Union of India,
               (2018) 2 SCC 413 : (2018) 1 SCC (L&S) 404 : 2017 INSC
               1243;Ravinder Kumar Dhariwal v. Union of India,
               (2023) 2 SCC 209 : (2023) 1 SCC (L&S) 181 : 2021 INSC
               916; Vikash Kumar v. UPSC, (2021) 5 SCC 370 : (2021)
               2 SCC (L&S) 1 : 2021 INSC 78.] Thus, the right to
               accessibility is foundational, enabling PWDs to exercise
               and benefit from other rights enshrined in Part III of the
               Constitution.”
                                                   (Emphasis supplied)

[p] 61. We would like to refer to the observations of this Court inOm
       Rathod v. Director General of Health Services, reported in
       2024 SCC OnLine SC 3130, to further elaborate upon the
       principles of law on substantive equality in disability rights. It
       was observed thatSection 3of the Rights of Persons withDisabilities Act, 2016, casts a positive obligation on the State as
       well as private entities to ensure that no person with disability
       faces     discrimination.    The     Court   held   that   reasonable
       accommodation is a facet of substantive equality and failure to
       reasonably      accommodate        constitutes   discrimination.     The
       relevant observations read thus:-

[p] In Vikash Kumar (supra) this Court held thatSection 3casts an affirmative obligation on the Government and
             private entities to take steps to ensure reasonable
             accommodation and utilize the capacity of persons with
             disabilities by providing an appropriate environment.
             There is a positive obligation to realise the inclusive
             premise in the concept of reasonable accommodation.
             This includes the duty to create an environment
             conducive for the development of persons with
             disabilities. This Court has held that:

[p] 62. Although accessibility and reasonable accommodation are
       distinct concepts, as already recognized inRajive Raturi v.
       Union of India, reported in (2024) 16 SCC 654, yet the
       foundation for both is a substantive approach to equality and
       removal of barriers that impede the effective realization of rights.
       To put this in context, a commitment to accessibility would
       reflect in making the washrooms at school accessible for
       children with disabilities. However, this is not enough,
       reasonably accommodating a girl child with disability would also
       mean making menstrual absorbents available and educating all
       the students about menstruation and MHM measures.

[p] 63. Thus, we have no hesitation in saying that inaccessibility means
       not only depriving a girl child with disability of education but
       also violating her right to equality, freedom, and dignity. To
       reasonably accommodate means actively creating a conducive
       environment for children with disabilities.

[p] 70. When we recognize dignity as forming a significant part of
         human existence, we acknowledge the value of life. Dignity
         makes life livable. There is no gainsaying to the fact that the


13Common Cause v. Union of India, (2018) 5 SCC 1.

[p] 71. In this regard, we shall refer to the decision in K.S. Puttaswamy
       (Privacy-9 J.) v. Union of India, reported in (2017) 10 SCC 1,
       wherein this Court categorically held that dignity is an integral
       part of the Constitution, and its reflections are found inArticles
       14, 19, and21, respectively. This Court noted that dignity can
       neither be given nor taken away. It held that there is a positive
       obligation on the State to not only protect one’s dignity but also
       take steps to facilitate it. It was observed that dignity ties all the
       fundamental rights together. The relevant observations read
       thus:-

[p] 113. Human         dignity      was     construed      inM.
             Nagaraj v. Union of India [M. Nagarajv. Union of India,
             (2006) 8 SCC 212 : (2007) 1 SCC (L&S) 1013] by a
             Constitution Bench of this Court to be intrinsic to and
             inseparable from human existence. Dignity, the Court
             held, is not something which is conferred and which
             can be taken away, because it is inalienable : (SCC pp.
             243 & 247-48, paras 26 & 42)
                “26. … The rights, liberties and freedoms of the
                individual are not only to be protected against the
                State, they should be facilitated by it. … It is the
                duty of the State not only to protect the human
                dignity but to facilitate it by taking positive steps in
                that direction. No exact definition of human dignity
                exists. It refers to the intrinsic value of every human
                being, which is to be respected. It cannot be taken
                away. It cannot give (sic be given). It simply is.
                Every human being has dignity by virtue of his
                existence. …
                                           ***

[p] 72.InCommon Cause v. Union of India, reported in (2018) 5 SCC
       1, Chandrachud, J., opined that the Constitution protects the
       legitimate expectation of a person to live a life with dignity. The
       relevant observations read thus:-

[p] 73. Recently, inGaurav Kumar v. Union of India, reported in
       (2025) 1 SCC 641, wherein one of us, J.B. Pardiwala, J., was a
       part of the Bench, this Court elucidated the importance of
       dignity in achieving substantive equality. This Court held thatW.P. (C) No. 1000 of 2022                                   Page 49 of 126dignity encompasses the right of the individual to develop their
       potential to the fullest. The relevant observations read thus:-

[p] 76. Dignity cannot be assured without privacy. Privacy is one of the
       rights that are inherent in a human being by virtue of mere
       existence. Being a natural right, it inures every individual
       irrespective of their caste, class, gender, or any other similar
       differentiating ground. Privacy enables each individual to make
       choices and take decisions in respect of intimate and personal
       matters, free from interference. It is this conception of natural
       and inalienable right that secures the autonomy of human
       being.

[p] 77. In Puttaswamy (supra), this Court held the right to privacy to
       be a constitutionally protected right underArticle 21.It
       recognized privacy as a natural right which is inherent in a
       human and not bestowed by the State. It was observed that
       privacy ensures the fulfilment of dignity and is a core value
       which protection of life and liberty has intended to achieve. In
       furtherance of this constitutional protection, the Court held that
       it is the duty of the State to safeguard the autonomy of an
       individual. The relevant observations read thus:-

[p] It finds an origin in the notion that there are certain
             rights which are natural to or inherent in a humanW.P. (C) No. 1000 of 2022                                   Page 51 of 126being. Natural rights are inalienable because they are
             inseparable from the human personality. The human
             element in life is impossible to conceive without the
             existence of natural rights. In 1690, John Locke had in
             his Second Treatise of Government observed that the
             lives, liberties and estates of individuals are as a
             matter of fundamental natural law, a private preserve.
             The idea of a private preserve was to create barriers
             from      outside     interference.    In    1765, William
             Blackstone in his Commentaries on the Laws of
             England spoke of a “natural liberty”. There were, in his
             view, absolute rights which were vested in the
             individual by the immutable laws of nature. These
             absolute rights were divided into rights of personal
             security, personal liberty and property. The right of
             personal security involved a legal and uninterrupted
             enjoyment of life, limbs, body, health and reputation by
             an individual.

[p] 78. Bobde, J., in his concurring opinion in Puttaswamy (supra),
       stated that privacy is a prerequisite for the exercise of liberty
       and the freedom to perform any activity. Consequently, the
       absence of privacy denies an individual the freedom to exercise
       that particular liberty or to undertake such activity. Similarly,
       Nariman, J., recognized the privacy of choice as an individual’s
       autonomy over fundamental choices.

[p] 79. As a sequitur, autonomy is a concomitant of privacy. We say so
       because privacy is founded on the autonomy of an individual. At
       the same time, dignity cannot exist without privacy. In
       Puttaswamy (supra), this Court defined autonomy as “the
       ability to make decision on vital matters of concern to life”. While
       lucidly elucidating facets of privacy, this Court recognized an
       individual’s authority to make decisions as regards their body
       and mind. Further, while identifying the various facets of
       privacy, the Court recognized decisional privacy to mean the
       ability of an individual to make intimate decisions, including
       those relating to sexual autonomy. The relevant observations
       read thus:-

[p] 80.In this regard, inCommon Cause(supra), this Court held thus:-

[p] 81. As explained in the aforementioned paragraphs of this
       judgment, the right to equality does not merely mandate that
       the State refrains from discrimination but also obliges it to adopt
       positive and affirmative measures aimed at remedying existing
       structural disadvantage. Likewise, in Puttaswamy (supra), this
       Court recognized that privacy has both positive and negative
       dimensions. In its positive aspect, it imposes an obligation on
       the State to take all necessary measures to protect the privacy
       of the individual.

[p] 86. We may refer with profit the decision inLakshmi Kant Pandey
       v. Union of India, reported in (1984) 2 SCC 244, wherein this
       Court highlighted the centrality of children to the nation’s
       growth and development. It was observed that the framers of the
       Constitution were conscious of the inherent vulnerability of
       children and hence, reflected inArticle 15(3).The relevant
       observations read thus:-

[p] 87.In a petition filed underArticle 32, issues arising from
       occupational health hazards and diseases affecting workmen
       employed in asbestos industries fell for consideration before this
       Court inConsumer Education & Research Centre v. Union
       of India, reported in (1995) 3 SCC 42. A three Judge Bench of
       this Court held that the right to health of a workman is an
       integral facet of the meaningful right to life. It encompasses not
       only healthy existence but also a robust and healthy lifestyle.
       This Court held that the right to health and medical care is a
       fundamental right underArticle 21read withArticles 39(e), 41and43of the Constitution respectively, insofar as the life of the
       workman is considered to make it meaningful and dignified. It
       was further held that the State is under an obligation to promote
       health of a workman. The relevant observations read thus:-

[p] 88.InDevika Biswas v. Union of India, reported in (2016) 10 SCC
       726, a petition before this Court raised issues, inter alia,
       regarding   the   conduct    and   management      of   sterilization
       procedures, more particularly, the death occurring therefrom. In
       this regard, the Court held that the right to reproductive health
       encompasses the right to make all allied decisions and to attain
       the highest standards of reproductive health. The relevant
       observations read thus:-

[p] 110. Over time, there has been recognition of the need
             to respect and protect the reproductive rights and
             reproductive health of a person. Reproductive health
             has been defined as “the capability to reproduce and
             the freedom to make informed, free and responsible
             decisions. It also includes access to a range of
             reproductive health information, goods, facilities and
             services to enable individuals to make informed, free
             and responsible decisions about their reproductive
             behaviour”. [ WHO, Sexual Health, Human Rights and
             the Law (2015) cited from Committee on Economic,
             Social and Cultural Rights, General Comment No. 22
             (2016) on the Right to Sexual and Reproductive Health
             (Article 12of the International Covenant on Economic,
             Social and Cultural Rights), 2-5-2016, E/C.12/GC/22
             at         para        6        <https://documents-dds-

[p] 111. This Court recognised reproductive rights as an
             aspect of personal liberty underArticle 21of the
             Constitution    in Suchita   Srivastava v. Chandigarh
             Admn.[Suchita     Srivastava v. Chandigarh     Admn.,
             (2009) 9 SCC 1 : (2009) 3 SCC (Civ) 570] The freedom
             to exercise these reproductive rights would include the
             right to make a choice regarding sterilisation on the
             basis of informed consent and free from any form of
             coercion.[…]

[p] 112. It is necessary to reconsider the impact that
             policies such as the setting of informal targets and
             provision of incentives by the Government can have on
             the reproductive freedoms of the most vulnerable
             groups of society whose economic and social conditions
             leave them with no meaningful choice in the matter and
             also render them the easiest targets of coercion. The
             cases       ofPaschim      Banga      Khet      Mazdoor
             Samity [Paschim Banga Khet Mazdoor Samity v. State
             of W.B., (1996) 4 SCC 37] and Bandhua Mukti
             Morcha [Bandhua Mukti Morcha v. Union of India,
             (1984) 3 SCC 161 : 1984 SCC (L&S) 389] have
             emphasised that the State's obligation in respect of
             fundamental rights must extend to ensuring that the
             rights of the weaker sections of the community are not
             exploited by virtue of their position. Thus, the policies
             of the Government must not mirror the systemic
             discrimination prevalent in society but must be aimed
             at remedying this discrimination and ensuring
             substantive equality. In this regard, it is necessary that
             the policies and incentive schemes are made gender
             neutral and the unnecessary focus on female
             sterilisation is discontinued.”
                                                 (Emphasis supplied)W.P. (C) No. 1000 of 2022                                  Page 66 of 126

[p] 89. The views expressed by this Court in Independent Thought v.

[p] Union of India, reported in (2017) 10 SCC 800, are
       commendable. It held that the concept of good health is not
       limited to physical well-being but rather a girl child’s right to
       grow into a healthy woman, to exercise choice, and to pursue
       education. It was observed that when a girl child is deprived of
       the opportunity to study further, her right to live a dignified life
       as a woman is also violated. The Court further emphasized that
       a girl child must not only be afforded equality of opportunity
       with a male child, but must also be provided with additional
       support, so as to enable her empowerment physically, mentally,
       and economically. The relevant observations read as under:-

[p] 90. A three Judge Bench of this Court inX2 v. State (NCT of Delhi),
       reported in (2023) 9 SCC 433, wherein one of us, J.B.
       Pardiwala, J., was part of the Bench, held that the right to decide
       on all matters relating to sexual and reproductive health is one
       flower in the bouquet of reproductive rights. It held that
       reproductive rights include the right to access education and
       information about sexual health. The relevant observations read
       thus:-

[p] 91. It is limpid that when a girl child cannot access menstrual
          absorbents, she may resort to natural materials, newspaper,
          cloth, tissue, cotton wool, or any other unhygienic absorbent. In
          case of a lack of adequate clean water and soap, she may also
          struggle to properly clean and dry herself. It is not unknown that
          poor menstrual hygiene may cause reproductive tract infections
          such as bacterial vaginosis, which may in turn lead to
          infertility.14

[p] 94. It is an admitted position that the lack of access to MHM violates
          the right to reproductive health, as it compels girl children to

14 Belen Torondel, Shalini Sinha, et.al., “Association between Unhygienic Menstrual
Management Practices and Prevalence of Lower Reproductive Tract Infections: A Hospital-
Based Cross-Sectional Study in Odisha, India” 18 BMC Infectious Diseases 473 (2018),
available at: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/30241498/.

[p] 96. It would be worthwhile to refer to the observations made by this
         Court inState of A.P. v. P.B. Vijaykumar, reported in (1995)
         4 SCC 520, wherein this Court had the occasion to interpret the
         expression “any special provision for women” inArticle 15(3)of
         the Constitution. In such circumstances, it was observed that
         the object of the clause is to strengthen and improve the status
         of women. The Court held that the special provision referred inArticle 15(3)could be either in the form of affirmative action or
         reservation.

[p] 15Society For Enlightenment & Voluntary Action v. Union of India, 2024 SCC OnLine SC 2922;

[p] Maniben Maganbhai Bhariya v. Distt. Development Officer, Dahod, (2022) 16 SCC 343.

[p] 99. The opening declaration of the Constitution, “We, the People”,
          illustrates that the Constitution and its principles thrive on
          participation. Equality is not confined to the recognition of
          individual dignity, it encompasses the assurance of equal


16M. Nagaraj v. Union of India, (2006) 8 SCC 212.

[p] 102. In the aforesaid context, the Constitution recognizes that
       entrenched disadvantage cannot be dismantled by mere
       neutrality on the part of the State. Hence, it imposed a positive
       constitutional duty upon the State to adopt affirmativeW.P. (C) No. 1000 of 2022                                Page 73 of 126measures aimed at redressing inequalities.Articles 14, 15and16respectively reflect the constitutional commitment to uplift
       those placed at systemic disadvantage and to secure their
       effective   participation   on   equal   terms   in    the   nation’s
       opportunities and institutions.

[p] 103. Over the years, this Court has recognized the right to participate
       as an essential expression of the right to equality. A Constitution
       Bench inNavtej Singh Johar v. Union of India, reported in
       (2018) 10 SCC 1, heldSection 377of the Indian Penal Code,
       1860, unconstitutional to the extent it was discriminatory, being
       premised on stereotypes and stigma about genders. It denied full
       and equal participation of certain individuals as citizens and
       equal enjoyment of life. This Court held that equitable justice
       can be achieved only by “inclusion of all and exclusion of none”.
       It was noted that the ideals of the Constitution can be achieved
       only when each and every individual is able to participate in all
       walks of life. The relevant observations read thus:-

[p] The Supreme Court cannot afford to denude itself of its
             leadership    as an       institution  in expounding
             constitutional values. Any loss of its authority will
             imperil democracy itself.”
                                                 (Emphasis supplied)

[p] 104.InJane Kaushik(supra), this Court held that elimination of
       structural and institutional discrimination is necessary for
       participation in society.The decision inJane Kaushik(supra)
       relied on Vikash Kumar v. UPSC, reported in (2021) 5 SCC
       370, to highlight that reasonable accommodation flows from
       positive obligations on State to facilitate participation of persons
       with disability in society. The Court held thatArticles 14, 15,
       and16of the Constitution respectively provide a framework for
       equality that translates into participation. Further, it was noted
       that the right to participate traces itself to the right to freedom
       of expression and the right to life, in order to make life
       meaningful. The relevant observations read thus:-

[p] 105. We may also look into the decision in Nipun Malhotra v. Sony
          Pictures Films India (P) Ltd., reported in 2024 SCC OnLine
          SC 1639, wherein this Court recognized that stereotype
          exacerbates    systemic     inequalities,    and     inhibits   dignified
          participation in education or employment. What has been
          conveyed in so many words by this Court is that stereotype stem
          from a lack of familiarity, and this lack arises due to inadequate
          representation and participation. Again, in Sukanya Shantha
          v. Union of India, reported in (2024) 15 SCC 535, this Court
          reiterated that meaningful participation in social life is
          obstructed when treatment is based on stereotype.

[p] 114. Awareness not only reduces the act of teasing, passing
       insensitive remarks, or promoting stereotypical practices but
       also prevents self-exclusion by girls from schooling. This way,
       the participation becomes continuous and equal rather than
       conditional and irregular. These structural deficiencies are a
       cause for inconvenience to menstruating girl children. Moreover,
       it curtails their participation in school and defeats the human
       right of education, which includes inclusive education.

[p] 117. The idea behind equal opportunities is to stimulate her
          potential, and provide her with more choice and space to
          develop. The principle of equality of opportunity is an essential
          part of social justice. In a monograph on social justice, equal
          opportunity has been categorized as thus:-19
          i.   First, having an equal start, i.e., those with identical
               potential should be given the opportunity to survive and
               develop. In this regard, John Rawls study states that

18  Sandra Fredman, “Substantive Equality Revisited” 14 International Journal of
Constitutional Law 723 (2016).

[p] 118. We may aptly refer to the decision in State of Karnataka v.

[p] Appa Balu Ingale, reported in 1995 Supp (4) SCC 469,
       wherein this Court observed that dignity of a person is
       acknowledged by providing them equality of status and
       opportunity. It recognized that denial of equal opportunities in
       any aspect of life is denial of equal status and is reflective of
       inhibiting equal participation. The relevant observations read
       thus:-

[p] 121. The resultant effect of frequent and prolonged absenteeism is
       dropping out. At this age, dropping out forecloses future
       opportunities, eventually limiting access to higher education,
       employment, social participations, to name a few. In other
       words, the consequence is not merely economic deprivation, but
       narrowing life chances as well. Thus, the impairment of
       educational opportunity during formative years has a cascading
       effect later in life. Furthermore, it restricts a woman’s ability to
       make informed choices regarding health, family, and civic
       participation.

[p] 124. The concept of social justice requires that everyone’s life to be
       meaningful and livable with human dignity. This Court inConsumer Education(supra), has recognized social justice to
       be species of broad idea of justice. In other words, social justice
       mitigates    inherent      disadvantages        and     elevates       the
       disadvantaged to the level of equality to live a life with dignity.
       The observations read thus:-

[p] 125. Equality of status and opportunity flows from the constitutional
       principles on equality code.InM. Nagaraj v. Union of India,
       reported in (2006) 8 SCC 212, this Court recognized that there
       can be no justice without equality of status and of opportunity.InIndian Medical Assn. v. Union of India, reported in (2011)
       7 SCC 179, this Court observed that aspects of socially just and
       equitable society are an essential component of the basic
       equality code itself. The Court further observed that the policies
       of the State must be in consonance with the principles of equity
       and justice inherent inArticles 14, 19, and21of the
       Constitution respectively. The relevant observations read thus:-

[p] 128.InAnjuman Ishaat-e-Taleem Trust v. State of Maharashtra,
       reported in 2025 SCC OnLine SC 1912, Dipankar Datta, J.,
       succinctly highlighted the constitutional journey ofArticle 21Aand the right to elementary education in India. The decision
       traces the relevant judicial pronouncements, discussed in the
       earlier parts of this judgment, which recognized education as an
       essential part of the right to life, and contributed towards
       insertion ofArticle 21Ain the Constitution. The relevant
       observations read thus:-

[p] 130.In light of the aforesaid,Devesh Sharma v. Union of India,
       reported in (2023) 18 SCC 339, held that the fundamental right
       to education must be meaningful, and of good “quality”. This
       Court traced the country’s progress in making the right toW.P. (C) No. 1000 of 2022                                 Page 90 of 126education a justiciable and enforceable right. The relevant
       observations read thus:-

[p] 131.InAvinash Mehrotra v. Union of India, reported in (2009) 6
       SCC 398, a PIL sought safer school conditions in order to protect
       the right to life and the right to education underArticles 21and21Arespectively. The petitioner approached this Court pursuant
       to an incident when a fire broke out in a private school’s kitchen
       while the mid-day meal was being prepared leading to death of
       several students. In such circumstances, this Court held that
       the right to education includes the right to a safe school. It
       observed that the right to education is an inalienable human
       right, and is, as essential to the life of an individual as health
       and dignity. It further observed that the Government shall makeW.P. (C) No. 1000 of 2022                                Page 92 of 126an endeavour to implementArticle 21Ain its letter and spirit.

[p] The relevant observations read thus:-

[p] 132. A three Judge Bench in State of T.N. v. K. Shyam Sunder,
       reported in (2011) 8 SCC 737, while dealing with the challenge
       relating to implementation of uniform system of education in
       Tamil Nadu observed that there shall be no discrimination in
       quality of education. It was observed that the right to education
       shall not be restricted only to free and compulsory education but
       also encompasses quality education. The quality of education
       disseminated shall be uniform irrespective of social, economic,
       and cultural background. Education is not merely access to
       school but an active process of developing the knowledge, skill,
       mind by formal schooling. The relevant observations read thus:-

[p] 24.InState of Orissa v. Mamata Mohanty[(2011) 3
             SCC 436 : (2011) 2 SCC (L&S) 83], this Court
             emphasised the importance of education observing that
             education connotes the whole course of scholastic
             instruction which a person has received. Education
             connotes the process of training and developing the
             knowledge, skill, mind and character of students by
             formal schooling.The Court further relied upon the
             earlier judgment inOsmania University Teachers'
             Assn. v. State of A.P.[(1987) 4 SCC 671 : AIR 1987 SC
             2034], wherein it has been held as under : (Osmania
             University Teachers' Assn.case [(1987) 4 SCC 671 :

[p] 135. The decision inAnjuman Ishaat-e-Taleem Trust(supra),
       pithily expresses the core objectives of theRTE Actand captures
       the vista ofArticle 21A.The relevant observations read thus:-

[p] 136. It would be apposite to refer to the decision inDevesh Sharma
          v. Union of India, reported in (2023) 18 SCC 339, wherein this
          Court was dealing with the question, whether the National
          Council for Teacher Education was right in including BEd
          qualification for appointment to the post of primary school
          teacher. In other words, the Court assessed whether BEd
          candidates were trained to teach in primary classes. In this
          context, the Court held that free and compulsory education
          would be meaningless if it is not quality education. The quality
          of education is influenced by many factors, one of them being
          the qualifications of teachers. The Court held that any
          compromise on “quality” of education would be a violation ofArticle 21A.

[p] 138. In Society for Unaided Private Schools of Rajasthan v.

[p] Union of India20, reported in (2012) 6 SCC 1, the Court held
          that the word “free” in the title of theRTE Actindicates removal


20 The decision in Society forUnaided Private Schools of Rajasthan(supra)has been overruledbyPramati Educational & Cultural Trust(supra) insofar as it held that theRTE Actwas
applicable to aided minority schools. Thus, the RTE Act is not applicable to aided or unaided
minority schools covered underArticle 30(1)of the Constitution.

[p] of any financial barrier that prevents a child from elementary
       education. It was observed that the provisions of theRTE Actenvisaged    imparting    quality   education    which    comprises
       providing required infrastructure and complying with standards
       specified by theRTE Act. The relevant observations read thus:-

[p] While interpreting the statute through the ‘always speaking’
          rule of interpretation, the Court held that, in furtherance ofSection 3of the RTE Act, private unaided schools are required
          to provide necessary devices to the 25% EWS/DG students free
          of cost, as such devices are indispensable for accessing
          education. The schools under theRTE Actmust ensure that the
          students are able to access the mode of teaching opted by the
          respective schools. The Court observed that by not providing the
          equipment, the schools are creating a financial barrier qua such
          students. The relevant observations read thus:-

[p] 21Kadambur Higher Secondary School v. Kerala State Commissionfor Protection of Child Rights

Sreeganesh, 2024 SCC OnLine Ker 1746.

[p] 143.InMaster Manjunath v. Union of India, reported in 2019 SCC
       OnLine Kar 3101, the question before the Karnataka High
       Court was whether the State Government is under an obligation
       to provide two sets of uniforms to the children to whom SectionW.P. (C) No. 1000 of 2022                                 Page 102 of 1263 of theRTE Actis applicable. The school provided only one set
       of uniform. In such circumstances, the Court              directed
       distribution of second set of uniforms as a Government Order
       dated 30.06.2018 permitted its distribution, and held that if the
       rules require the children to compulsorily wear uniforms, the
       parents would have to incur expenses, and ultimately it will
       prevent the children from pursuing education. The Court
       observed that providing one set of uniform for five or six days
       would be irrational or rather unhygienic.

[p] 146. We must mention that any condition that forces a girl child to
       choose between dignity and education cannot be regarded as
       just and equitable. The failure to provide sanitary napkins
       creates a gender-specific barrier that impedes attendance, and
       continuity in education, thereby defeating the substantive
       guarantee of free and compulsory education. We further stress
       that whileSection 3guarantees the right to education,Section
       19operates at the institutional level by prescribing minimum
       infrastructural standards in order to strengthen the right to
       education. Thus, the provisions must be read conjunctively.

[p] 154.InRadha Shekhawat v. State of Rajasthan, reported in 2015
       SCC OnLine Raj 3428, the Rajasthan High Court took
       cognizance of the report submitted by the Advocate General,
       wherein it was stated that construction was underway in 176
       schools which had no toilets, and 700 schools which had only
       one toilet. The Court expressed dismay at the non-availability of
       toilets and the condition of existing toilets, which were nothing
       more than walls to hide, without any door, roof, or facility of
       water.

[p] The Court directed that the responsibility of construction
       and maintenance of toilets shall be shared by the School
       Management Committee, and the Sarpanch in light ofArticle
       243(G)of the Constitution. Needless to say, the Court held that
       the right to education remains unfulfilled, if there are
       inadequate classrooms, electricity, water, and proper toilets in
       the schools. The relevant observations read thus:-

[p] 155. The Madras High Court, inSetupati Higher Secondary School
       v. State of T.N., reported in 2016 SCC OnLine Mad 31508,
       dealt with the issue, whether the Government, being the funding
       authority in a recognized and aided private school, has the right
       to frame rules for fixation of teaching posts and to grant approval
       for appointments, including vocational instructor posts.The
       High Court rejected the contention of the respondent-State by
       placing reliance on the decision of this Court inState of
       Orissa v. Mamata Mohanty, reported in (2011) 3 SCC 436. Inthe said decision, this Court held that paucity of funds cannot
       be a ground for the State to evade maintenance of educational
       standards.

[p] Taking into considerationSections 19and25of the RTE Act
       respectively, read with the Schedule, the Court held that the
       Government cannot shirk its duties and run away from its
       responsibilities, stating that due to a want of funds, posts
       cannot be sanctioned in schools. In such circumstances, the
       Court directed the respondents to approve the appointment of a
       vocational instructor. The relevant observations read thus:-

[p] 156. We may look into the decision of the Uttarakhand High Court inDeepak Rana v. State of Uttarakhand, reported in 2016 SCC
       OnLine Utt 2454, wherein the Court expressed disappointment
       at the condition of school infrastructure in the State. The Court
       found that there were no toilets for girls in 67 schools. It
       observed that the fundamental right to free and compulsory
       education entails the availability of basic facilities such as aW.P. (C) No. 1000 of 2022                                 Page 110 of 126school building with furniture, blackboards, toilets, free
       uniforms and books, and mid-day meal facilities. The lack of
       infrastructure was identified as a major factor lowering the
       standards of education. At last, the Court issued a slew of
       directions, including the construction and maintenance of
       separate toilets for boys and girls.

[p] 157. The Calcutta High Court inState of W.B. v. Krishnendu
       Biswas, reported in 2025 SCC OnLine Cal 2888, while dealing
       with the enhancement of qualification of the respondent therein,
       observed that there are drop-outs or out-of-school children in
       society, and it is the duty of the State to fulfil the object of theRTE Actqua those children. The Court noted that factors
       contributing towards the drop-out of children from school, more
       particularly girls, are poor sanitary problems due to poor
       infrastructural facilities. The relevant observations read thus:-

[p] 158. An application was filed by a school for recognition of classes I
       to IV but was rejected by the Kerala State Educational
       Department on the ground that the school did not have a
       playground, and there were 15 government-aided schools within
       5 kms of the applicant school.In such circumstances, the Kerala
       High Court inSt Mary's English Medium School v. State of
       Kerala, reported in 2025 SCC OnLine Ker 4092, took notice ofSections 18and19of the RTE Act respectively and the Schedule
       appended to the Act.

[p] The Court refused to interfere with the order of rejection as
       the school was not set up according to the norms and standards
       provided in the Schedule. It was held that adherence to the
       prescribed norms and standards must not be mere lip service.
       The relevant observations read thus:-

[blockquote] “26. Public education is not a "right" granted to
             individuals   by    the   Constitution. San   Antonio
             Independent School Dist. v. Rodriguez, 411 U.S. 1,35,
             93 S.Ct. 1278, 1298, 36 L.Ed.2d 16 (1973). But neither
             is    it   merely   some     governmental    "benefit"

[blockquote] “8. The Preamble promises to secure justice “social,
             economic and political” for the citizens. A peculiar
             feature of the Indian Constitution is that it combines
             social and economic rights along with political and
             justiciable legal rights. The Preamble embodies the goal
             which the State has to achieve in order to establish
             social justice and to make the masses free in the
             positive sense. The securing of social justice has been
             specifically enjoined an object of the State underArticle
             38of the Constitution. Can the objective which has
             been so prominently pronounced in the Preamble andArticle 38of the Constitution be achieved without
             providing education to the large majority of citizens
             who are illiterate. The objectives flowing from the
             Preamble cannot be achieved and shall remain on
             paper unless the people in this country are educated.

[blockquote] “42. The significance of education, in particular basic
             education [ As enshrined insection 29(1)of the
             Constitution.] for individual and societal development
             in our democratic dispensation in the light of the legacy
             of apartheid, [ As pointed out by Berger in ‘The Rights
             to Education under the South African Constitution’ (Apr
             2003) vol 103, No 3 Columbia Law Review, 616, the
             separatist national education policy under apartheid,
             manifested in the Bantu Education Act 47 of 1953, was
             an integral part of apartheid's segregationist objective.]
             cannot be overlooked. The inadequacy of schooling
             facilities, particularly for many blacks [ Blacks here
             also denoting Indians and Coloureds.] was entrenched
             by the formal institution of apartheid, after 1948, when
             segregation even in education and schools in South
             Africa was codified. Today, the lasting effects of the
             educational segregation of apartheid are discernible inW.P. (C) No. 1000 of 2022                                  Page 28 of 126the systemic problems of inadequate facilities and the
             discrepancy in the level of basic education for the
             majority of learners.

[blockquote] “171. Section 497 amounts to a denial of substantive
             equality. The decisions inSowmithri [Sowmithri
             Vishnu v. Union of India, 1985 Supp SCC 137 : 1985
             SCC (Cri) 325] and Revathi [V. Revathi v. Union of
             India, (1988) 2 SCC 72 : 1988 SCC (Cri) 308] espoused
             a formal notion of equality, which is contrary to the
             constitutional vision of a just social order. Justness
             postulates equality. In consonance with constitutional
             morality, substantive equality is “directed at
             eliminating individual, institutional and systemic
             discrimination against disadvantaged groups which
             effectively undermines their full and equal social,
             economic, political and cultural participation in society”
             [ S. Martin and K. Mahoney (Eds.), Kathy
             Lahey, Feminist Theories of (In)equality, in Equality
             and Judicial Neutrality (1987).] . To move away from a
             formalistic notion of equality which disregards social
             realities, the Court must take into account the impact of
             the rule or provision in the lives of citizens.

[blockquote] 172. The primary enquiry to be undertaken by the
             Court towards the realisation of substantive equality is
             to determine whether the provision contributes to the
             subordination of a disadvantaged group of individuals.

[blockquote] “87. Indian     constitutional     jurisprudence     has
             consistently held the guarantee of equality to be
             substantive and not a mere formalistic requirement.
             Equality is at the nucleus of the unified goals of social
             and economic justice.InMinerva Mills [Minerva Mills
             Ltd. v. Union of India, (1980) 3 SCC 625] it was
             observed : (SCC p. 709, para 111)
                “111. … the equality clause in the Constitution does
                not speak of mere formal equality before the law but
                embodies the concept of real and substantive
                equality which strikes at inequalities arising on
                account of vast social and economic differentials
                and is consequently an essential ingredient of social
                and economic justice. The dynamic principle of
                egalitarianism fertilises the concept of social and
                economic justice; it is one of its essential elements
                and there can be no real social and economic justice
                where there is a breach of the egalitarian principle.”
                                                  (emphasis supplied)W.P. (C) No. 1000 of 2022                                 Page 37 of 126

[blockquote] 88. Thus, equality is a feature fundamental to our
             Constitution but, in true sense of terms, equality
             envisaged by our Constitution as a component of social,
             economic and political justice is real and substantive
             equality, which is to organically and dynamically
             operate against all forms of inequalities. This process
             of striking at inequalities, by its very nature, calls for
             reasonable classifications so that equals are treated
             equally while unequals are treated differently and as
             per their requirements.

[blockquote] xxx

[blockquote] 99. Thus, it could reasonably be summarised that for
             the socio-economic structure which the law in our
             democracy seeks to build up, the requirements of real
             and substantive equality call for affirmative actions;

[blockquote] “22. Accessibility is not merely a convenience, but a
             fundamental requirement for enabling individuals,
             particularly those with disabilities, to exercise their
             rights fully and equally. Without accessibility,
             individuals are effectively excluded from many aspects
             of society, whether that be education, employment,
             healthcare, or participation in cultural and civic
             activities. Accessibility ensures that persons with
             disabilities are not marginalised but are instead able to
             enjoy the same opportunities as everyone else, making
             it an integral part of ensuring equality, freedom, and
             human dignity. By embedding accessibility as a
             human right within existing legal frameworks, it
             becomes clear that it is an essential prerequisite for the
             exercise of other rights.

[blockquote] xxx

[blockquote] 26. Similarly, A.K. Sikri, J. in the 2017 judgment [Rajive
             Raturi v. Union of India, (2018) 2 SCC 413 : (2018) 1
             SCC (L&S) 404] grounded the right to accessibility in
             the fundamental rights chapter of the Constitution,
             emphasizing that access to public spaces and services
             is an essential aspect of the right to life and dignity.

[blockquote] “29. The principle of reasonable accommodation is not
               only statutorily prescribed but also rooted in the
               fundamental rights guaranteed to persons with
               disabilities under Part III of the Constitution.
               Reasonable accommodation is a fundamental right. It
               is a gateway right for persons with disabilities to enjoyW.P. (C) No. 1000 of 2022                                    Page 41 of 126all the other rights enshrined in the Constitution and
             the law. Without the gateway right of reasonable
             accommodation, a person with disability is forced to
             navigate in a world which excludes them by design. It
             strikes a fatal blow to their ability to make life choices
             and pursue opportunities. From mundane tasks of
             daily life to actions undertaken to realise personal and
             professional aspirations - all are throttled when
             reasonable accommodations are denied. Reasonable
             accommodation is a facet of substantive equality and
             its failure constitutes discrimination.[…]”

[blockquote] 30.Section 3of the RPWD Act affords persons with
             disabilities a right to equality and non-discrimination.

[blockquote] “… The accommodation which the law mandates is
                ‘reasonable’ because it has to be tailored to the
                requirements of each condition of disability. The
                expectations which every disabled person has are
                unique to the nature of the disability and the
                character of the impediments which are encountered
                as its consequence.

[blockquote] …

[blockquote] 48. Failure to meet the individual needs of every
                disabled person will breach the norm of reasonable
                accommodation. Flexibility in answering individual
                needs and requirements is essential to reasonable
                accommodation. The principle of reasonable
                accommodation must also account for the fact that
                disability based discrimination is intersectional in
                nature. The intersectional features arise in
                particular contexts due to the presence of multipleW.P. (C) No. 1000 of 2022                                  Page 42 of 126disabilities and multiple consequences arising from
                disability. Disability therefore cannot be truly
                understood by regarding it as unidimensional.”
                                               (emphasis supplied)”

                                                (Emphasis supplied)

[blockquote] “Jurisprudence on dignity

[blockquote] 108. Over the last four decades, our constitutional
             jurisprudence has recognised the inseparable
             relationship between protection of life and liberty with
             dignity. Dignity as a constitutional value finds
             expression in the Preamble. The constitutional vision
             seeks the realisation of justice (social, economic and
             political); liberty (of thought, expression, belief, faith
             and worship); equality (as a guarantee against
             arbitrary treatment of individuals) and fraternity
             (which assures a life of dignity to every individual).

[blockquote] “437. Under our Constitution, the inherent value which
             sanctifies life is the dignity of existence. Recognising
             human dignity is intrinsic to preserving the sanctity of
             life. Life is truly sanctified when it is lived with dignity.
             There exists a close relationship between dignity and
             the quality of life. For, it is only when life can be lived
             with a true sense of quality that the dignity of human
             existence is fully realised. Hence, there should be no
             antagonism between the sanctity of human life on the
             one hand and the dignity and quality of life on the other
             hand. Quality of life ensures dignity of living and
             dignity is but a process in realising the sanctity of life.

[blockquote] 438. Human dignity is an essential element of a
             meaningful existence. A life of dignity comprehends all
             stages of living including the final stage which leads to
             the end of life. Liberty and autonomy are essential
             attributes of a life of substance. It is liberty whichW.P. (C) No. 1000 of 2022                                    Page 48 of 126enables an individual to decide upon those matters
             which are central to the pursuit of a meaningful
             existence. The expectation that the individual should
             not be deprived of his or her dignity in the final stage of
             life gives expression to the central expectation of a
             fading life : control over pain and suffering and the
             ability to determine the treatment which the individual
             should receive. When society assures to each
             individual a protection against being subjected to
             degrading treatment in the process of dying, it seeks to
             assure basic human dignity. Dignity ensures the
             sanctity of life. The recognition afforded to the
             autonomy of the individual in matters relating to end-

[blockquote] “99. Dignity is crucial to substantive equality. The
             dignity of an individual encompasses the right of the
             individual to develop their potential to the fullest. [K.S.
             Puttaswamy (Privacy-9 J.) v. Union of India, (2017) 10
             SCC 1, para 525] The right to pursue a profession of
             one's choice and earn livelihood is integral to the dignity
             of an individual. Charging exorbitant enrolment fees
             and miscellaneous fees as a precondition for enrolment
             creates a barrier to entry into the legal profession. The
             levy of exorbitant fees as a precondition to enrolment
             serves to denigrate the dignity of those who face social
             and economic barriers in the advancement of their legal
             careers.     [   SeeNeil     Aurelio     Nunes       (OBC
             Reservation) v. Union of India, (2022) 4 SCC 1, para 35]
             This effectively perpetuates systemic discrimination
             against persons from marginalised and economically
             weaker sections by undermining their equal
             participation in the legal profession. Therefore, the
             current enrolment fee structure charged by SBCs is
             contrary to the principle of substantive equality.”

                                                 (Emphasis supplied)

[blockquote] “G. Natural and inalienable rights

[blockquote] 42. Privacy is a concomitant of the right of the
             individual to exercise control over his or her personality.

[blockquote] “297. What, then, does privacy postulate? Privacy
             postulates the reservation of a private space for the
             individual, described as the right to be let alone. The
             concept is founded on the autonomy of the individual.
             The ability of an individual to make choices lies at theW.P. (C) No. 1000 of 2022                                 Page 53 of 126core of the human personality. The notion of privacy
             enables the individual to assert and control the human
             element which is inseparable from the personality of
             the individual. The inviolable nature of the human
             personality is manifested in the ability to make
             decisions on matters intimate to human life. The
             autonomy of the individual is associated over matters
             which can be kept private. These are concerns over
             which there is a legitimate expectation of privacy. The
             body and the mind are inseparable elements of the
             human personality. The integrity of the body and the
             sanctity of the mind can exist on the foundation that
             each individual possesses an inalienable ability and
             right to preserve a private space in which the human
             personality can develop. Without the ability to make
             choices, the inviolability of the personality would be in
             doubt. Recognising a zone of privacy is but an
             acknowledgment that each individual must be entitled
             to chart and pursue the course of development of
             personality. Hence privacy is a postulate of human
             dignity itself. Thoughts and behavioural patterns which
             are intimate to an individual are entitled to a zone of
             privacy where one is free of social expectations. In that
             zone of privacy, an individual is not judged by others.
             Privacy enables each individual to take crucial
             decisions which find expression in the human
             personality. It enables individuals to preserve their
             beliefs, thoughts, expressions, ideas, ideologies,
             preferences and choices against societal demands of
             homogeneity. Privacy is an intrinsic recognition of
             heterogeneity, of the right of the individual to be
             different and to stand against the tide of conformity in
             creating a zone of solitude. Privacy protects the
             individual from the searching glare of publicity in
             matters which are personal to his or her life. Privacy
             attaches to the person and not to the place where it is
             associated. Privacy constitutes the foundation of all
             liberty because it is in privacy that the individual can
             decide how liberty is best exercised. Individual dignity
             and privacy are inextricably linked in a pattern wovenW.P. (C) No. 1000 of 2022                                 Page 54 of 126out of a thread of diversity into the fabric of a plural
             culture.

[blockquote] 298. Privacy of the individual is an essential aspect of
             dignity. Dignity has both an intrinsic and instrumental
             value. As an intrinsic value, human dignity is an
             entitlement or a constitutionally protected interest in
             itself. In its instrumental facet, dignity and freedom are
             inseparably intertwined, each being a facilitative tool to
             achieve the other. The ability of the individual to protect
             a zone of privacy enables the realisation of the full
             value of life and liberty. Liberty has a broader meaning
             of which privacy is a subset. All liberties may not be
             exercised in privacy. Yet others can be fulfilled only
             within a private space. Privacy enables the individual
             to retain the autonomy of the body and mind. The
             autonomy of the individual is the ability to make
             decisions on vital matters of concern to life. Privacy has
             not been couched as an independent fundamental
             right. But that does not detract from the constitutional
             protection afforded to it, once the true nature of privacy
             and its relationship with those fundamental rights
             which are expressly protected is understood. Privacy
             lies across the spectrum of protected freedoms. […]
             Above all, the privacy of the individual recognises an
             inviolable right to determine how freedom shall be
             exercised. […] Read in conjunction withArticle 21,
             liberty enables the individual to have a choice of
             preferences on various facets of life including what and
             how one will eat, the way one will dress, the faith one
             will espouse and a myriad other matters on which
             autonomy and self-determination require a choice to be
             made within the privacy of the mind. […] Dignity cannot
             exist without privacy. Both reside within the
             inalienable values of life, liberty and freedom which the
             Constitution has recognised. Privacy is the ultimate
             expression of the sanctity of the individual. It is a
             constitutional value which straddles across the
             spectrum of fundamental rights and protects for the
             individual a zone of choice and self-determination.”W.P. (C) No. 1000 of 2022                                   Page 55 of 126(Emphasis supplied)

[blockquote] “441. The protective mantle of privacy covers certain
             decisions that fundamentally affect the human life
             cycle. [ Richard Delgado, “Euthanasia Reconsidered—
             The Choice of Death as an Aspect of the Right of
             Privacy”, Arizona Law Review (1975), Vol. 17, at p.

[blockquote] 474.] It protects the most personal and intimate
             decisions of individuals that affect their life and
             development. [Ibid.] Thus, choices and decisions on
             matters such as procreation, contraception and
             marriage have been held to be protected. While death
             is an inevitable end in the trajectory of the cycle of
             human life of individuals are often faced with choices
             and decisions relating to death. Decisions relating to
             death, like those relating to birth, sex, and marriage,
             are protected by the Constitution by virtue of the right
             of privacy. The right to privacy resides in the right to
             liberty and in the respect of autonomy. [ T.L.
             Beauchamp, “The Right to Privacy and the Right to
             Die”, Social Philosophy and Policy (2000), Vol. 17, at p.

[blockquote] 276.] The right to privacy protects autonomy in making
             decisions related to the intimate domain of death as
             well as bodily integrity.[…]”
                                                 (Emphasis supplied)

[blockquote] “6. It is obvious that in a civilized society the
             importance of child welfare cannot be over-
             emphasized, because the welfare of the entire
             community, its growth and development, depend on the
             health and well-being of its children. Children are a
             “supremely important national asset” and the future
             well-being of the nation depends on how its children
             grow and develop. The great poet Milton put it
             admirably when he said: “Child shows the man as
             morning shows the day” and the Study Team on Social
             Welfare said much to the same effect when it observed
             that “the physical and mental health of the nation is
             determined largely by the manner in which it is shapedW.P. (C) No. 1000 of 2022                                 Page 58 of 126in the early stages”. The child is a soul with a being, a
             nature and capacities of its own, who must be helped
             to find them, to grow into their maturity, into fullness of
             physical and vital energy and the utmost breath, depth
             and height of its emotional, intellectual and spiritual
             being; otherwise there cannot be a healthy growth of
             the nation. Now obviously children need special
             protection because of their tender age and physique,
             mental immaturity and incapacity to look after
             themselves. That is why there is a growing realisation
             in every part of the globe that children must be brought
             up in an atmosphere of love and affection and under
             the tender care and attention of parents so that they
             may be able to attain full emotional, intellectual and
             spiritual stability and maturity and acquire self-
             confidence and self-respect and a balanced view of life
             with full appreciation and realisation of the role which
             they have to play in the nation building process without
             which the nation cannot develop and attain real
             prosperity because a large segment of the society
             would then be left out of the developmental process. In
             India this consciousness is reflected in the provisions
             enacted in the Constitution. clause (3) ofArticle 15enables the State to make special provisions inter alia
             for children andArticle 24provides that no child below
             the age of fourteen years shall be employed to work in
             any factory or mine or engaged in any other hazardous
             employment. Clauses (e) and (f) ofArticle 39provide
             that the State shall direct its policy towards securing
             inter alia that the tender age of children is not abused,
             that citizens are not forced by economic necessity to
             enter avocations unsuited to their age and strength and
             that children are given facility to develop in a healthy
             manner and in conditions of freedom and dignity and
             that childhood and youth are protected against
             exploitation and against moral and material
             abandonment. These constitutional provisions reflect
             the great anxiety of the constitution makers to protect
             and safeguard the interest and welfare of children in
             the country. The Government of India has also in
             pursuance of these constitutional provisions evolved aW.P. (C) No. 1000 of 2022                                   Page 59 of 126National Policy for the Welfare of Children. This Policy
             starts with a goal-oriented preambulatory introduction:

[blockquote] “The nation's children are a supremely important
                 asset. Their nurture and solicitude are our
                 responsibility. Children's programme should find a
                 prominent part in our national plans for the
                 development of human resources, so that our
                 children grow up to become robust citizens,
                 physically fit, mentally alert and morally healthy,
                 endowed with the skills and motivations needed by
                 society. Equal opportunities for development to all
                 children during the period of growth should be our
                 aim, for this would serve our larger purpose of
                 reducing inequality and ensuring social justice.”
             The National Policy sets out the measures which the
             Government of India proposes to adopt towards
             attainment of the objectives set out in the
             preambulatory introduction and they include measures
             designed to protect children against neglect, cruelty
             and exploitation and to strengthen family ties “so that
             full potentialities of growth of children are realised
             within the normal family neighbourhood and
             community environment”. The National Policy also lays
             down priority in programme formation and it gives
             fairly high priority to maintenance, education and
             training of orphan and destitute children. There is also
             provision made in the National Policy for constitution of
             a National Children's Board and pursuant to this
             provision, the Government of India has constituted the
             National Children's Board with the Prime Minister as
             the chair-person. It is the function of the National
             Children's Board to provide a focus for planning and
             review and proper co-ordination of the multiplicity of
             services striving to meet the needs of children and to
             ensure at different levels continuous planning, review
             and co-ordination of all the essential services. The
             National Policy also stresses the vital role which the
             voluntary organisations have to play in the field of
             education, health, recreation and social welfare
             services for children and declares that it shall be theW.P. (C) No. 1000 of 2022                                 Page 60 of 126endeavour of State to encourage and strengthen such
             voluntary organisations.”
                                             (Emphasis supplied)

[blockquote] “20.Article 1of the Universal Declaration of Human
             Rights asserts      human      sensitivity   and     moral
             responsibility of every State that “all human beings are
             born free and equal in dignity and rights. They are
             endowed with reason and conscience and should act
             towards one another in a spirit of brotherhood.” The
             Charter of the United Nations thus reinforces the faith
             in fundamental human rights and in the dignity and
             worth of human person envisaged in the Directive
             Principles of State Policy as part of the Constitution. The
             jurisprudence of personhood or philosophy of the right
             to life envisaged underArticle 21, enlarges its sweep to
             encompass human personality in its full blossom with
             invigorated health which is a wealth to the workman to
             earn his livelihood, to sustain the dignity of person and
             to live a life with dignity and equality.

[blockquote] xxx

[blockquote] 23. In Sunil Batra v. Delhi Admn. [(1978) 4 SCC 494 :

[blockquote] 1979 SCC (Cri) 155] , considering the effect of solitary
             confinement of a prisoner sentenced to death and the
             meaning of the word ‘life’ enshrined underArticle 21,
             the Constitution Bench held that the quality of life
             covered byArticle 21is something more than the
             dynamic meaning attached to life and liberty. The same
             view was reiterated inBoard of Trustees of the Port of
             Bombay v. D.R. Nadkarni[(1983) 1 SCC 124 : 1983
             SCC (L&S) 61] , Vikram Deo Singh Tomar v. State of
             Bihar [1988 Supp SCC 734 : 1989 SCC (Cri) 66]
             , Ramsharan Autyanuprasi v. Union of India [1989
             Supp (1) SCC 251] .InCharles Sobraj v. Supdt., Central
             Jail, Tihar[(1978) 4 SCC 104 : 1978 SCC (Cri) 542 : AIR
             1978 SC 1514] this Court held that the right to life
             includes right to human dignity. The right against
             torture, cruel or unusual punishment or degraded
             treatment was held to violate the right to life.InBandhua Mukti Morcha v. Union of India[(1984) 3
             SCC 161 : 1984 SCC (L&S) 389] at pp. 183-84 this
             Court held that the right to live with human dignity,
             enshrined inArticle 21, derives its life-breath from the
             Directive Principles of State Policy and particularly
             clauses (e) and (f) ofArticle 39andArticles 41and42.InC.E.S.C. Ltd. v. Subhash Chandra Bose[(1992) 1
             SCC 441 : 1992 SCC (L&S) 313] this Court considered
             the gamut of operational efficacy of human rights and
             constitutional rights, the right to medical aid and health
             and held that the right to social justice are fundamental
             rights.Right to free legal aid to the poor and indigent
             worker was held to be a fundamental right in Khatri
             (II) v. State of Bihar [(1981) 1 SCC 627 : 1981 SCC (Cri)
             228] .Right to education was held to be a fundamental
             right videMaharashtra State Board of Secondary &
             Higher Secondary Education v. K.S. Gandhi[(1991) 2
             SCC 716] and Unni Krishnan, J.P. v. State of
             A.P.[(1993) 1 SCC 645]

[blockquote] 24. The right to health to a worker is an integral facet
             of meaningful right to life, to have not only a meaningfulW.P. (C) No. 1000 of 2022                                  Page 62 of 126existence but also robust health and vigour without
             which worker would lead life of misery. Lack of health
             denudes him of his livelihood. Compelling economic
             necessity to work in an industry exposed to health
             hazards due to indigence to bread-winning for himself
             and his dependants, should not be at the cost of the
             health and vigour of the workman. Facilities and
             opportunities, as enjoined inArticle 38, should be
             provided to protect the health of the workman.

[blockquote] “(i) Right to health

[blockquote] 107. It is well established that the right to life underArticle 21of the Constitution includes the right to lead
             a dignified and meaningful life and the right to health
             is an integral facet of this right. In CESC
             Ltd. v. Subhash Chandra Bose [CESC Ltd. v. Subhash
             Chandra Bose, (1992) 1 SCC 441 : 1992 SCC (L&S)
             313] dealing with the right to health of workers, it was
             noted that the right to health must be considered an
             aspect of social justice informed by not onlyArticle 21of the Constitution, but also the Directive Principles of
             State Policy and international covenants to which India
             is a party. Similarly, the bare minimum obligations of
             the State to ensure the preservation of the right to lifeW.P. (C) No. 1000 of 2022                                  Page 64 of 126and health were enunciated in Paschim Banga Khet
             Mazdoor Samity v. State of W.B. [Paschim Banga Khet
             Mazdoor Samity v. State of W.B., (1996) 4 SCC 37]

[blockquote] 108. In Bandhua         Mukti      Morcha v. Union     of
             India [Bandhua Mukti Morcha v. Union of India, (1984)
             3 SCC 161 : 1984 SCC (L&S) 389] this Court underlined
             the obligation of the State to ensure that the
             fundamental rights of weaker sections of society are
             not exploited owing to their position in society.

[blockquote] “179. There can be no dispute that every citizen of this
             country has the right to get good healthcare. Every
             citizen can expect that the State shall make best
             endeavours for ensuring that the health of the citizen is
             not adversely affected. By now it is well settled by a
             catena of judgments of this Court that the “right to life”
             envisaged inArticle 21of the Constitution of India is
             not merely a right to live an animal existence. This
             Court has repeatedly held that right to life means a
             right to live with human dignity. Life should be
             meaningful and worth living. Life has many shades.
             Good health is the raison d'être of a good life. Without
             good health there cannot be a good life. In the case of a
             minor girl child good health would mean her right to
             develop as a healthy woman. This not only requires
             good physical health but also good mental health. The
             girl child must be encouraged to bloom into a healthy
             woman. The girl child must not be deprived of her right
             of choice. The girl child must not be deprived of her right
             to study further. When the girl child is deprived of her
             right to study further, she is actually deprived of her
             right to develop into a mature woman, who can earn
             independently and live as a self-sufficient independentW.P. (C) No. 1000 of 2022                                   Page 67 of 126woman. In the modern age, when we talk of gender
             equality, the girl child must be given equal opportunity
             to develop like a male child. In fact, in my view, because
             of the patriarchal nature of our society, some extra
             benefit must be showered upon the girl child to ensure
             that she is not deprived of her right to life, which would
             include her right to grow and develop physically,
             mentally and economically as an independent self-
             sufficient female adult.”
                                                   (Emphasis supplied)

[blockquote] “101. The ambit of reproductive rights is not restricted
             to the right of women to have or not have children. It
             also includes the constellation of freedoms and
             entitlements that enable a woman to decide freely on
             all matters relating to her sexual and reproductive
             health. Reproductive rights include the right to access
             education and information about contraception and
             sexual health, the right to decide whether and what
             type of contraceptives to use, the right to choose
             whether and when to have children, the right to choose
             the number of children, the right to access safe and
             legal abortions, and the right to reproductive
             healthcare. Women must also have the autonomy to
             make decisions concerning these rights, free from
             coercion or violence.”
                                               (Emphasis supplied)W.P. (C) No. 1000 of 2022                                  Page 68 of 126

[blockquote] “264. The very existence ofSection 377IPC
             criminalising transgenders casts a great stigma on an
             already oppressed and discriminated class of people.
             This stigma, oppression and prejudice has to be
             eradicated and the transgenders have to progress from
             their narrow claustrophobic spaces of mere survival in
             hiding with their isolation and fears to enjoying the
             richness of living out of the shadows with full
             realisation of their potential and equal opportunities in
             all walks of life. The ideals and objectives enshrined in
             our benevolent Constitution can be achieved only when
             each and every individual is empowered and enabled
             to participate in the social mainstream and in the
             journey towards achieving equality in all spheres,W.P. (C) No. 1000 of 2022                                    Page 74 of 126equality of opportunities in all walks of life, equal
             freedoms and rights and, above all, equitable justice.
             This can be achieved only by inclusion of all and
             exclusion of none from the mainstream.

[blockquote] xxx

[blockquote] 602. The flourishing of a constitutional order requires
             not only the institutional leadership of constitutional
             courts, but also the responsive participation of the
             citizenry. [ Marc Galanter, “Fifty Years on”, in B.N.
             Kirpal et al, Supreme but Not Infallible : Essays in
             Honour of the Supreme Court of India, Oxford
             University Press (2000), at p. 57.] Constitutional
             morality is a pursuit of this responsive participation.

[blockquote] “97. A fundamental requirement of substantive
             equality is the elimination of structural and institutional
             discrimination to achieve true participation in social
             settings by the community being discriminated against.

[blockquote] Articles 14, 15and16of the Constitution respectively
             provide a framework for equality that translates into
             participation of communities situated at the fringes of
             society and mandate that the constitutional vision of
             inclusion of different and diverse voices be achieved.
             Such a constitutional mandate flows not only from the
             equality provisions contained inArticles 14, 15and16respectively but also from the broader themes of
             freedom of speech, expression and participation
             enshrined inArticle 19along with the right to a
             dignified social life contained inArticle 21.The
             fundamental right to equality, fundamental freedoms
             and the right to life together ensure and aspire for
             meaningful participation and expression of the
             minorities.”
                                         xxx

[blockquote] “10. The Preamble of the Indian Constitution imbued its
             people with pride of being its citizens in an integrated
             Bharat with fraternity, dignity of person and equality
             of status. But casteism; sectional and religious
             diversities and parochialism are disintegrating the
             people. Social stratification needs restructure.
             Democracy meant fundamental changes in the social
             and economic life of the people, absence of inequitous
             conditions, inequalities and discrimination. There can
             be no dignity of person without equality of status and
             opportunity. Denial of equal opportunities in any walkW.P. (C) No. 1000 of 2022                                 Page 82 of 126of social life is denial of equal status and amounts to
             preventing equal participation in social intercourse and
             deprivation of equal access to social means. Human
             relations based on equality, equal protection of laws
             without discrimination would alone generate amity and
             affinity among the heterogenous sections of the Indian
             society and a feeling of equal participants in the
             democratic polity. Adoption of new ethos and
             environment are, therefore, imperatives to transform
             the diffracted society into high degree of mobility for
             establishing an egalitarian social order in Secular
             Socialist Democratic Bharat Republic.[…]”

                                               (Emphasis supplied)

[blockquote] “18. The Preamble andArticle 38of the Constitution of
             India — the supreme law, envisions social justice as its
             arch to ensure life to be meaningful and liveable with
             human dignity.[…]The Constitution commands justice,
             liberty, equality and fraternity as supreme values to
             usher in the egalitarian social, economic and political
             democracy. Social justice, equality and dignity of
             person are cornerstones of social democracy. The
             concept “social justice”, which the Constitution of India
             engrafted, consists of diverse principles essential for
             the orderly growth and development of personality of
             every citizen. “Social justice” is thus an integral part of
             ‘justice’ in the generic sense. Justice is the genus, of
             which social justice is one of its species. Social justice
             is a dynamic device to mitigate the sufferings of the
             poor, weak, dalits, tribals and deprived sections of the
             society and to elevate them to the level of equality to
             live a life with dignity of person. Social justice is not a
             simple or single idea of a society but is an essential part
             of complex social change to relieve the poor etc. from
             handicaps, penury to ward off distress and to make
             their life liveable, for greater good of the society at large.
             In other words, the aim of social justice is to attain
             substantial degree of social, economic and political
             equality, which is the legitimate expectation. Social
             security, just and humane conditions of work andW.P. (C) No. 1000 of 2022                                     Page 85 of 126leisure to workman are part of his meaningful right to
             life and to achieve self-expression of his personality
             and to enjoy the life with dignity; the State should
             provide facilities and opportunities to enable them to
             reach at least minimum standard of health, economic
             security and civilised living while sharing according to
             their capacity, social and cultural heritage.

[blockquote] 19. […]The constitutional concern of social justice as an
             elastic continuous process is to accord justice to all
             sections of the society by providing facilities and
             opportunities to remove handicaps and disabilities with
             which the poor etc. are languishing and to secure
             dignity of their person. The Constitution, therefore,
             mandates the State to accord justice to all members of
             the society in all facets of human activity. The concept
             of social justice embeds equality to flavour and enliven
             practical content of ‘life’. Social justice and equality are
             complementary to each other so that both should
             maintain their vitality. Rule of law, therefore, is a potent
             instrument of social justice to bring about equality in
             results.”
                                                    (Emphasis supplied)

[blockquote] “165. It is now a well-settled principle of our
             constitutional jurisprudence thatArticle 14does not
             merely aspire to provide for our citizens mere formal
             equality, but also equality of status and of opportunity.
             The goals of the nation State are the securing for all of
             its citizens a fraternity assuring the dignity of the
             individual and the unity of the nation. While justice—
             social, economic and political is mentioned in onlyArticle 38, it was also recognised that there can be no
             justice without equality of status and of opportunity
             (seeM. Nagaraj [M. Nagaraj v. Union of India, (2006) 8
             SCC 212 : (2007) 1 SCC (L&S) 1013] ). As recognised
             by Babasaheb Ambedkar, at the moment that our
             Constitution just set sail, that while the first rule of the
             ship, in the form of formal equality, was guaranteed,
             inequality in terms of access to social and economic
             resources was rampant and on a massive scale, and
             that so long as they individually, and the social groups
             they were a part of, continue to not access to social and
             economic resources that affords them dignity, they
             would always be on the margins of the ship, with the
             ever present danger of falling off that ship and thereby
             never partaking of the promised goals of that ship.
             Babasaheb Ambedkar with great foresight remarked
             that unless such more fundamental inequalities, that
             foster conditions of injustice, and limit liberty of thought
             and of conscience, are eradicated at the earliest, the
             ship itself would be torn apart.

[blockquote] xxx

[blockquote] 168. An important and particular aspect of our
             Constitution that should always be kept in mind is that
             various aspects of social justice, and an egalitarian
             social order, were also inscribed, not as exceptions to
             the formal content of equality but as intrinsic, vital and
             necessary components of the basic equality code itself.

[blockquote] “72. The right to elementary education in India did not
             begin its journey as a fundamental right. In the
             Constitution, as originally drafted, elementary
             education was initially recognized only as a Directive
             Principle of State Polic underArticle 45, which provided:

[blockquote] “The State shall endeavour to provide, within a
                period of ten years from the commencement of this
                Constitution, for free and compulsory education for
                all children until they complete the age of fourteen
                years.”

[blockquote] 73.Article 45seems to be the only directive principle
             framed with a specific time frame, reflecting the
             urgency and significance that the framers ofW.P. (C) No. 1000 of 2022                                  Page 89 of 126the Constitution placed on its implementation. This
             directive, though aspirational, was unfortunately not
             judicially enforceable and depended heavily on the
             discretion and capacity of the State. The framers of
             the Constitution consciously placed ‘EDUCATION’ in
             Part IV, recognizing its criticality but also
             acknowledging the financial and administrative
             limitations of the newly independent nation.

[blockquote] xxx

[blockquote] 80. These judicial efforts culminated in theConstitution
             (Eighty-sixth Amendment) Act, 2002, which introducedArticle 21Ainto the Constitution.

[blockquote] 81. AlongsideArticle 21A, the amendment also
             substitutedArticle 45to focus on early childhood care
             and education and introduced a corresponding
             fundamental duty underArticle 51A(k), requiring
             parents and guardians to ensure educational
             opportunities for their children between the ages of 6
             and 14.

[blockquote] 82.Article 21A, thus, marked a constitutional
             transformation by elevating the child's right to free and
             compulsory elementary education to the status of an
             enforceable fundamental right.”
                                               (Emphasis supplied)

[blockquote] “14. The 1986 National Policy on Education, modified
             in the year 1992, declared that free and compulsory
             elementary education of “satisfactory quality” be given
             to all children up to the age of fourteen years, before
             the nation enters the next century i.e. 21st Century.

[blockquote] 15. Later, in the seminal judgment of this Court in Unni
             Krishnan, J.P. v. State of A.P. [Unni Krishnan,J.P. v. State of A.P., (1993) 1 SCC 645 : 1 SCEC 523 :

[blockquote] AIR 1993 SC 2178] , it was held that children have a
             fundamental right to free education, till they complete
             the age of fourteen years.

[blockquote] 16. In the year 1997, in order to make free and
             compulsory education a fundamental right the 83rd
             Constitutional Amendment Bill was introduced in
             Parliament, to insert a new Article in Part III of the
             Constitution of India, which was to be Article 21-A. The
             Bill was sent for the scrutiny of the Parliamentary
             Standing       Committee      on   Human       Resources
             Development. The Standing Committee not only
             welcomed the amendment but in addition emphasises
             on the “quality of elementary education”. This is what
             it said:

[blockquote] “The eminent educationists felt that the Bill is silent
                 on the “Quality” of Education. They suggested that
                 there should be a reference to “quality” of education
                 in the Bill. The Secretary, Education agreed that the
                 “quality” aspect also has to be seen. Education
                 definitely must mean “quality” education and
                 anything less than that should not be called
                 education. Therefore, the emphasis would be
                 through strengthening the teacher education
                 content, the Secretary stated.” [ Para 13 of the
                 Report of the Parliamentary Standing Committee on
                 Human Resource Development.]W.P. (C) No. 1000 of 2022                                   Page 91 of 126

[blockquote] 17. Finally, by way of the Constitution (86thAmendment) Act, 2002,Article 21-A, was inserted as a
             fundamental right in Part III of the Constitution, and
             made effective from 1-4-2010.Article 21-Aof the
             Constitution reads as under:

[blockquote] “21-A. Right to education.—The State shall provide
                free and compulsory education to all children of the
                age of six to fourteen years in such manner as the
                State may, by law, determine.”

[blockquote] 18. In order to fulfil the above mandate the Right to
             Education Act, 2009, was passed by Parliament on 20-

[blockquote] “35. The Constitution likewise provides meaning to the
             word “education” beyond its dictionary meaning.
             Parents should not be compelled to send their children
             to dangerous schools, nor should children suffer
             compulsory education in unsound buildings.

[blockquote] 36. Likewise, the State's reciprocal duty to parents
             begins with the provision of a free education, and it
             extends to the State's regulatory power. No matter
             where a family seeks to educate its children, the State
             must ensure that children suffer no harm in exercising
             their fundamental right and civic duty. States thus bear
             the additional burden of regulation, ensuring that
             schools provide safe facilities as part of a compulsory
             education.

[blockquote] xxx

[blockquote] 38. This     Court     inAshoka     Kumar       Thakurcase observed as under: (SCC p. 660, para 482)6“482. It has become necessary that the Government
                set a realistic target within which it must fully
                implementArticle 21-Aregarding free and
                compulsory education for the entire country. The
                Government should suitably revise budget
                allocations for education. The priorities have to be
                set correctly. The most important fundamental right
                may beArticle 21-A, which, in the larger interest of
                the nation, must be fully implemented. WithoutArticle 21-A, the other fundamental rights are
                effectively rendered meaningless. Education stands
                above other rights, as one's ability to enforce one's
                fundamental rights flows from one's education. This
                is ultimately why the judiciary must oversee the
                Government spending on free and compulsory
                education.”

[blockquote] 39. In view of the importance ofArticle 21-A, it is
             imperative that the education which is provided toW.P. (C) No. 1000 of 2022                                Page 93 of 126children in the primary schools should be in the
             environment of safety.”
                                            (Emphasis supplied)

[blockquote] “20. The right to education is a fundamental right underArticle 21-Ainserted by the Eighty-sixth Amendment of
             the Constitution. Even before the said amendment, this
             Court has treated the right to education as a
             fundamental right. (Vide Mohini Jain v. State of
             Karnataka[(1992) 3 SCC 666 : AIR 1992 SC 1858]
             ;Unni Krishnan, J.P. v. State of A.P.[(1993) 1 SCC 645
             :AIR    1993      SC     2178]      and T.M.A.    Pai
             Foundation v. State of Karnataka[(2002) 8 SCC 481].)

[blockquote] 21. There has been a campaign that right to education
             underArticle 21-Aof our Constitution be read in
             conformity withArticles 14and15of the Constitution
             and there must be no discrimination in quality of
             education. Thus, a common syllabus and a common
             curriculum is required. The right of a child should not
             be restricted only to free and compulsory education, but
             should be extended to have quality education without
             any discrimination on the ground of its economic, social
             and cultural background. Arguments of the
             propagators of this movement draw support from theW.P. (C) No. 1000 of 2022                                 Page 94 of 126judgment of the US Supreme Court inBrown v. Board
             of Education[98 L Ed 873 : 347 US 483 (1953)]
             overruling           its        earlier       judgment
             in Plessy v. Ferguson [41 L Ed 256 : 163 US 537
             (1895)] where it has been held that “separate education
             facilities are inherently unequal” and thus, violate the
             doctrine of equality.

[blockquote] AIR 1987 SC 2034], SCC p. 685, para 30)
                “30. … Democracy depends for its very life on a high
                standard of general, vocational and professional
                education. Dissemination of learning with search for
                new knowledge with discipline all round must be
                maintained at all costs.”
             The case at hand is to be proceeded with keeping this
             ethical backdrop in mind.”
                                                 (Emphasis supplied)

[blockquote] 133. A Constitution Bench inPramati Educational & Cultural
       Trust v. Union of India, reported in (2014) 8 SCC 1, upheld
       the constitutional validity of theConstitution (Eighty-sixth
       Amendment) Act, 2002, and categorically held that the insertion
       ofArticle 21Ain the Constitution does not violate the basic
       structure of the Constitution. However,Article 21Ais not self-

[blockquote] “86. As outlined in the Statement of Objects and
             Reasons accompanying the Right of Children to Free
             and Compulsory Education Bill, 200865, the objectives
             of the RTE Bill read:

[blockquote] “The Right of Children to Free and Compulsory
                 Education Bill, 2008, is anchored in the belief that
                 the values of equality, social justice and democracy
                 and the creation of a just and humane society can
                 be achieved only through provision of inclusive
                 elementary education to all. Provision of free and
                 compulsory education of satisfactory quality to
                 children from disadvantaged and weaker sections
                 is, therefore, not merely the responsibility of schools
                 run or supported by the appropriate Governments,
                 but also of schools which are not dependent on
                 Government funds.”

[blockquote] 87. Viewed holistically, theRTE Act—contrary to the
             commonly held belief— does not impose an onerous or
             excessive regulatory burden; rather, it lays down the
             bare minimum core obligations and standards that all
             schools [as defined inSection 2(n)] must follow toW.P. (C) No. 1000 of 2022                                   Page 96 of 126ensure that the constitutional promise envisioned byArticle 21Ais not rendered meaningless. They include
             requirements such as trained teachers, student-teacher
             ratio, adequate infrastructure, inclusive admission
             policies, age-appropriate common curriculum, etc. All
             these are indispensable to deliver quality elementary
             education.

[blockquote] 88. At its heart, theRTE Actis an instrument for
             universalisation of education, which is rooted in the
             values of social inclusion, national development, and
             child-centric growth. It is aimed at bridging the gap
             between privileged and disadvantaged, and it ensures
             that every child, regardless of caste, creed, class, or
             community, is given a fair and equal opportunity to
             learn, grow, and thrive.The RTE Actis designed not to
             stifle institutional autonomy but to uphold a threshold
             of dignity, safety, equity, and universality in the
             learning environment for a child.

[blockquote] 89. Born of Article 21A, the RTE Actis not merely
             another addition to the statute books. It is the living
             expression of a long-deferred promise. When the
             Constitution was first adopted, the right to education
             could find place only among the Directive Principles,
             tempered by the economic and institutional limitations
             of a newly independent nation; yet, the vision was
             never abandoned but merely postponed. It took the
             nation over half a century of democratic maturity, social
             awakening, and judicial insistence for this vision to be
             shaped into a fundamental right.

[blockquote] 90. In this sense,Article 21Astands, perhaps, a shade
             taller than many other rights, not merely by hierarchy
             but by the weight of the journey it carries—a journey of
             struggle, consensus, and above all, a reaffirmation that
             right to elementary education is not charity, but
             justice.”
                                                 (Emphasis supplied)W.P. (C) No. 1000 of 2022                                 Page 97 of 126

[blockquote] “7. The word “free” in the long title to the 2009 Act
             stands for removal by the State of any financial barrier
             that prevents a child from completing 8 years of
             schooling. The word “compulsory” in that title stands
             for compulsion on the State and the parental duty to
             send children to school. To protect and give effect to this
             right of the child to education as enshrined inArticle 21andArticle 21-Aof the Constitution, Parliament has
             enacted the 2009 Act.

[blockquote] 8. The 2009 Act received the assent of the President on
             26-8-2009. It came into force w.e.f. 1-4-2010. The
             provisions of this Act are intended not only to guarantee
             right to free and compulsory education to children, but
             it also envisages imparting of quality education by
             providing required infrastructure and compliance with
             specified norms and standards in the schools. The
             Preamble states that the 2009 Act stands enacted inter
             alia to provide for free and compulsory education to all
             children of the age 6 to 14 years. The said Act has been
             enacted to give effect toArticle 21-Aof the
             Constitution.”
                                                 (Emphasis supplied)

       a. Management of menstrual hygiene as a financial barrier
          underSection 3of the RTE Act

[blockquote] 139.Section 3of the RTE Act stipulates that every child of the ages
       of six to fourteen years shall have the right to free and
       compulsory education. The section aims to remove financialW.P. (C) No. 1000 of 2022                                   Page 99 of 126barriers which prevent a child from exercising its right to
       education. It reads thus:-

[blockquote] “3. Right of child to free and compulsory education.—
             [(1) Every child of the age of six to fourteen years,
             including a child referred to in clause (d) or clause (e) ofsection 2, shall have the right to free and compulsory
             education in a neighbourhood school till the completion
             of his or her elementary education.]
             (2) For the purpose of sub-section (1), no child shall be
             liable to pay any kind of fee or charges or expenses
             which may prevent him or her from pursuing and
             completing the elementary education.

[blockquote] “10. The survey report, submitted in pursuance to the
             orders passed by the Court, has brought on record the
             fact that even where there are toilets available, they are
             either broken or not suitable for girls, and that all mostW.P. (C) No. 1000 of 2022                                 Page 107 of 126all the toilets are not being properly maintained. We
             have already observed that the open and unclean
             toilets are of no consequence, unless separate toilets
             are provided for girls and boys, and that each toilet has
             a roof and door with a latch by which can be closed,
             specially for girls, water and that it is regularly
             cleaned.

[blockquote] xxx

[blockquote] 12. We find sufficient force in the contention of learned
             counsel appearing for the petitioner that apart from the
             school staff, who is responsible for construction and
             maintenance of the toilets, the responsibility should
             also be shared by the School Management Committee,
             which is chaired by the parents, and of which the Head
             Master is the Secretary. Learned Advocate General has
             also made valuable suggestions that in order to secure
             availability of toilets in Government Schools and its
             maintenance, the Sarpanch of Panchayat should also
             be made responsible. We find sufficient force in the
             suggestions, inasmuch as, the Eleventh Schedule in the
             Constitution of India, with reference toArticle 243(G),
             gives the responsibility of availability of drinking water,
             and education including Primary and Upper Primary
             Schools, to village Panchayats. The right to receive
             education for the children guaranteed byArticle 21-Aof
             the Constitution of India, includes right to education in
             a hygienic conditions. The right to education remains
             unfulfilled, if there are inadequate class rooms,
             electricity, water and proper toilets in the schools.

[blockquote] xxx

[blockquote] 14. The Sarpanch of the village, will have overall
             supervision of the provision of toilets, and its
             maintenance and cleanliness in the schools in rural
             areas, and that the Schools Management Committee for
             all the schools both the urban and rural areas, will
             carry out overall supervision of the provision of
             maintenance and cleanliness of the toilets and
             availability of water in all the schools. It will be open to
             them to report the non-availability of the budget and its
             disbursement to the Block Development Officer in ruralW.P. (C) No. 1000 of 2022                                  Page 108 of 126areas and Elementary Education Officer in urban
             areas.”
                                          (Emphasis supplied)

[blockquote] “12.In the case ofState of Orissa v. Mamata Mohanty,
             reported in (2011) 3 SCC 436, the Hon'ble Supreme
             Court held that standard of teaching shall not suffer on
             the ground of want of funds/paucity of funds cannot
             be a ground for the State for not maintaining the
             standard of education and not providing quality
             education to its citizens. In Paragraph No. 33 ofthe said
             decision, the Hon'ble Supreme Court held thus:—W.P. (C) No. 1000 of 2022                                 Page 109 of 126“33. In view of the above, it is evident that education
                 is necessary to develop the personality of a person
                 as a whole and in totality as it provides the process
                 of training and acquiring the knowledge, skills,
                 developing mind and character by formal schooling.
                 Therefore, it is necessary to maintain a high
                 academic standard and academic discipline along
                 with academic rigour for the progress of a nation.
                 Democracy depends for its own survival on a high
                 standard of vocational and professional education.
                 Paucity of funds cannot be a ground for the State not
                 to provide quality education to its future citizens. It
                 is for this reason that in order to maintain the
                 standard of education the State Government
                 provides grant-in-aid to private schools to ensure the
                 smooth running of the institution so that the
                 standard of teaching may not suffer for want of
                 funds.”
                                         xxx

[blockquote] 16. Under such circumstances, the refusal for approval
             of appointment is without basis and without
             application of mind. Hence, the impugned orders, dated
             07.11.2014 and 10.11.2014, are set-aside and the
             respondents are directed to approve the appointment of
             Thiru. R. Kannan, as Vocational Instructor, in the
             petitioner school, with sanction of grant-in-aid, within a
             period of four weeks from the date of receipt of a copy
             of this order.”
                                                   (Emphasis supplied)

[blockquote] “16. The petitioner's termination also constitutes a
             violation of his “fundamental right to livelihood underArticle 21of the Constitution of India”. Depriving the
             drop out or out of school children from their free and
             compulsory education to children aged 6 to 14 years is
             sheer violation of theRTE Actand alsoArticle 21-Aof
             the Indian Constitution, inserted by the 86th
             Amendment in 2022 which mandates the State to
             provide free and compulsory education to all children
             aged 6 to 14 years as determined by law, making
             education a fundamental right.

[blockquote] 17. There is no dispute that there are no drop out
             students. The issue of dropout student continued to
             prevail in the country, preventing many children from
             attending school due to mainly engagement in domestic
             work to support their families, lack of interest in studiesW.P. (C) No. 1000 of 2022                                 Page 111 of 126and sometimes especially difficult for girls to continue
             study because of concerned about their safety and
             sanitary problems due to poor infrastructural facilities.

[blockquote] “7. Thus, a school must be set up according to the
             norms and standards as provided in Schedule read
             withSection 19, and it must have recognition from the
             competent authority to run the school. If the school does
             not have norms and standards prescribed under theW.P. (C) No. 1000 of 2022                                Page 112 of 126Schedule, no recognition can be granted and such a
             school cannot be allowed to be run. For running such a
             school which does not fulfill the norms and standards
             and does not have recognition, consequences are
             provided inSection 18itself.

[blockquote] 8. As per the Schedule, the school inter alia must have
             a building which should be all weather building
             consisting of the followings:

[blockquote] i. at least one class-room for every teacher and an
             office-cum-store-cum-Head teacher's room;
             ii. barrier-free access;

[blockquote] iii. separate toilets for boys and girls;

[blockquote] iv. safe and adequate drinking water facility to all
             children;

[blockquote] v. a kitchen where mid-day meal is cooked in the
             school;

[blockquote] vi. Playground;

[blockquote] vii. arrangements for securing the school building by
             boundary wall or fencing.

[blockquote] 9. The playground is one of the requirements of the
             building.

[blockquote] 10. The petitioner in the writ petition has not stated the
             dimensions of the playground of his school. Nowhere in
             the writ petition I find anything mentioned about the
             area of the playground which the petitioner school
             have.When the Actcontemplates playground, it means
             that it should be enough for sports facilities and if the
             playground is very small, it cannot be said to be a
             sufficient      playground.     When     the     Schedule
             contemplates a building to have a playground, it means
             it should have a playground of sufficient area in which
             sports can be played. In the absence of the requisite
             pleadings, I cannot accept the argument of the
             petitioner that the petitioner school has a playground of
             sufficient dimensions, which can provide a sports
             facility to its students.”
                                                  (Emphasis supplied)W.P. (C) No. 1000 of 2022                                 Page 113 of 126

[blockquote] 159. What emerges from the aforesaid discussion is that the
       fundamental right to education necessarily embodies the
       availability of basic and enabling facilities. These include clean
       and functional separate toilets commensurate with the strength
       of the students, access to sanitary napkins, and a designated
       and hygienic mechanism for the disposal of used sanitary
       napkins. These facilities are not ancillary conveniences but
       integral to ensuring barrier-free access to education, more
       particularly, for girl students.

[blockquote] 160. In the aforesaid context, compliance withSection 19read with
       the Schedule cannot be subjected to financial convenience. In
       other words, the State cannot be permitted to plead absence of
       funds as a justification for non-compliance with the norms and
       standards. We say so because the State is under an obligation
       to provide barrier-free access to education.

[blockquote] 161. The aforesaid is further fortified in light of the duties of the
       appropriate Government and local authority stipulated underSections 8and9respectively. The appropriate Government and
       the local authority are entrusted with the duty to provide
       infrastructure including school building, teaching staff and
       learning equipment. The appropriate Government and the local
       authority have to ensure and monitor admission, attendance
       and completion of elementary education by every child. Most
       importantly, it also has to ensure good quality elementary
       education conforming to the standards and norms specified in
       the Schedule.

[blockquote] 162. We need not discuss further on the requirement of separate
       toilets for boys and girls. The requirement for “barrier-free
       access” must be understood in a substantive sense. It obliges
       the schools not merely to ensure formal access to school
       buildings, but to proactively identify and remove all barriers
       impeding presence of a child in the school. To put this in
       context, the absence of sanitary napkins and a hygienic
       mechanism to dispose it results in absenteeism, or drop-out of
       girls from school. We are constrained to observe that such
       failure is not administrative but constitutional.

[blockquote] 163. What emerges is a stark constitutional failure, inasmuch as,
       although the statue mandates barrier-free access to the school
       building and separate toilets for boys and girls yet even after
       almost 17 years of enactment of the legislation, many schools
       continue to lack basic necessities for students. The norms and
       standardslaid down inthe Schedule are not merely procedural
       in nature but are integral to the effective realization ofSection 3of the RTE Act, and more particularly, the right to education
       underArticle 21A.


=== Court's Reasoning (78) ===

[p] 8.    In such circumstances referred to above, the petitioner is here
          before this Court with the present writ petition.

[p] 10. In pursuance of order dated 06.11.2023, the Union of India
       through the respondent nos. 1 to 3 respectively, has placed the
       Menstrual Hygiene Policy for School Going Girls. It is stated that
       the said policy has been approved by the Ministry of Health &
       Family Welfare. The policy aims to mainstream menstrual
       hygiene within the Government and Government-aided schools
       to bolster change in knowledge, attitudes, and behaviour among
       schoolgirls.

[p] State initiative    Sanitary  Routine supply of sanitary napkins to
                            napkins +  girls in upper-primary and secondary
                            Awareness  grades through vending machines along
                                       with IEC on MHM.

[p] Respondent no. 20 - Meghalaya
          Ayushman          Sanitary   Promotes safe menstrual hygiene
        Bharat Scheme      napkins +   through education. Separate toilets
                          Awareness + being made available. Awareness and
                             Toilets   sensitization on menstrual health,
                                       hygiene, cleanliness.

[p] State initiative   Awareness  Talk on menstrual health and hygiene
                                       was aired in regional language through
                                       AIR radio.

[p] State initiative   Awareness  Distribution of 6 sanitary napkins per
                                       month to girl students free of cost in
                                       standards VIII-XII.

[p] Respondent no. 31 - West Bengal
           Rashtriya         Sanitary  Sanitary napkins sold door-to-door in
            Kishore         napkins +  rural areas to girls aged 10-19 years at
           Swasthya          Disposal  Rs. 6 per pack. Used sanitary napkins
                                       are disposed of through incinerators.

[p] 22. Similarly, the Constitution of the United Nations Educational,
          Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) states that the
          purpose of the Organization is to further respect for human


3 UN Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (CESCR), General Comment No. 13:

[p] 4 UNESCO and Right to Education Initiative, Right to education handbook (2019), available at:

[p] 5 UN Committee on the Rights of the Child (CRC), General Comment No. 1: The Aims of
Education (Article 29) (2001), UN Doc CRC/GC/2001/1 (Apr. 17, 2001) available at:

[p] 43. Indeed, basic education is an important socio-
             economic right directed, among other things, at
             promoting and developing a child's personality, talents
             and mental and physical abilities to his or her fullest
             potential. [ See alsoArticle 29(1)of the Child Rights
             Convention, which provides—“States Parties agree that
             the education of the child shall be directed to:(a) The
             development of the child's personality, talents and
             mental and physical abilities to their fullest potential;(b)
             The development of respect for human rights and
             fundamental freedoms, and for the principles
             enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations;(c) The
             development of respect for the child's parents, his or her
             own cultural identity, language and values, for the
             national values of the country in which the child is
             living, the country from which he or she may originate,
             and for civilizations different from his or her own;(d)
             The preparation of the child for responsible life in a free
             society, in the spirit of understanding, peace, tolerance,
             equality of sexes, and friendship among all peoples,
             ethnic, national and religious groups and persons of
             indigenous origin;(e) The development of respect for the
             natural environment.”] Basic education also provides a
             foundation for a child's lifetime learning and work
             opportunities. To this end, access to school — an
             important component of the right to a basic education
             guaranteed to everyone bysection 29(1)(a)of the
             Constitution — is a necessary condition for the
             achievement of this right.”
                                                 (Emphasis supplied)

[p] 39. What appears from the aforesaid discussion is that the right to
       education is not confined to the physical existence or formal
       availability of schools. It extends to the ability of a child to
       participate in education in a meaningful, continuous, and non-
       discriminatory manner. In other words, mere enrolment does
       not fulfil the right if structural or practical barriers prevent
       regular participation, engagement, or progression within the
       educational system.

[p] 40. To enable a child’s participation in school by way of affirmative
       measures reflects commitment to the substantive approach to
       equality, which goes beyond formal access to schooling. Such
       affirmative measures mandate State action to ensure all
       children are placed equally to avail educational opportunities.

[p] 41. The exercise of the right to education requires the removal of
       impediments that obstruct its enjoyment. In the present case,
       these impediments include the lack of MHM measures, such as
       non-access to toilets, non-availability of menstrual absorbents,
       and absence of a safe disposal mechanism. These barriersW.P. (C) No. 1000 of 2022                                    Page 30 of 126disproportionately affect the right to education of adolescent
       female students. As a result, the State is under an obligation to
       address them through appropriate measures.

[p] 46. There is no gainsaying that equality cannot be restricted to a
          mere duty of restraint on the State. Substantive equality can be
          meaningfully realized only when it is supported by positive overt
          actions aimed at remedying existing structural disadvantages.
          In other words, such positive duties require the State to take
          proactive measures to address patterns of discrimination and
          exclusion. In the absence of the aforementioned affirmative
          obligations, structural inequalities are merely preserved, and
          the promise of equality will be reduced to a paper provision.

[p] 7 Peter Westen, The Empty Idea of Equality, 95 Harvard L. Rev. (1982), at 542.

[p] i. Menstruation as a barrier to the right to access education

[p] 48. In a research10 conducted on whether schools across the
         territory of India are menstrual-hygiene friendly, the researchers
         found that more than half of the girls did not have information
         about menstruation prior to menarche. The research revealed
         that the lack of sanitation facilities in schools hindered the
         ability of girls to manage menstruation healthily, safely, and
         with dignity.

[p] inaccessible. The inaccessibility was attributed to factors such
         as absence of dedicated funds for operation and maintenance,
         weak management, poor quality of construction, and the lack of
         availability of water within toilets.

[p] 50. We are disheartened to note that the availability of water for
         cleaning and flushing of toilets still remains a major concern.
         The Handbook further reported that MHM is absent in a majority
         of schools, including the lack of gender-specific infrastructure,
         access to sanitary napkins, and a disposal mechanism.

[p] 52. In the aforesaid study, among the reported reasons for absence,
         dysmenorrhea12 was the most prevalent, followed by restrictions
         at home, fear of staining clothes and difficulty in changing
         sanitary pads at school. The findings of the study revealed that

11 B.N. Patavegar, S. Ahmad, et.al., “A Study of School Absenteeism During Menstruation
Amongst Adolescent Schoolgirls in An Urban Area of North India” 15 National Journal of
Community Medicine 741 (2024).

[p] 12 Painful menstruation; see Merriam-Webster, “Dysmenorrhea”, Merriam-Webster Medical

Dictionary,               available               at:              https://www.merriam-
webster.com/dictionary/dysmenorrhea#medicalDictionary.

[p] a. Intersectionality of disability, gender, and access to
           education

[p] 64. What can be discerned from the above discussion is that the
       steps towards substantive equality are, first, the identification
       and recognition of disadvantage; and secondly, actions taken
       towards redressing that disadvantage. This Court is mindful
       that constitutional guarantees do not attain their true meaningW.P. (C) No. 1000 of 2022                                 Page 43 of 126by mere textual inclusion in statute books but through their
       realization in reality.

[p] 65. For a menstruating girl child who cannot afford menstrual
       absorbents, the disadvantage is two-fold. First, vis-à-vis
       menstruating     girl     children   who    can   afford   menstrual
       absorbents. Secondly, vis-à-vis male counterparts or non-
       menstruating counterparts. Further, when the menstruating
       girl child is also a child with disability, she is not merely facing
       disadvantages     arising     from   menstrual    poverty,   but   is
       additionally subjected to other disadvantageous consequences
       flowing from the intersection of gender and disability.

[p] 66. The aforesaid disadvantages can be redressed by ensuring
       access   to   clean     gender-segregated    washrooms,      sanitary
       napkins, or other suitable menstrual absorbents, hygienic and
       safe disposal mechanisms; and spreading awareness and
       imparting education on menstruation and MHM measures.

[p] 67. The right to education is a universally recognized human right,
       which, in circumstancesreferred to above, stands compromised
       and undermined for girl children. Menstrual poverty hinders
       menstruating girls from exercising their right to education with
       dignity equal to that of their male counterparts, or students who
       can afford sanitary products. There is no gainsaying that
       impairment of primary or secondary education has grave and
       lasting consequences, not only for individual development but
       also for long-term social and economic participation.

[p] 68. Many girls choose to absent themselves during menstruation
         due to lack of access to, or inability to afford, menstrual hygiene
         products, unavailability of gender-segregated washrooms, and
         absence of disposal mechanisms. This establishes a clear causal
         relationship between menstrual poverty and girls’ lower
         attendance in school. The absence of such measures lead many
         girls to absent themselves, or rather drop-out of school, leaving
         a lasting adverse impact on their education.

[p] right to a dignified existence secures decisional autonomy,
       enabling an individual to transform life from mere subsistence
       into a meaningful endeavour. Dignity inheres in every stage and
       every aspect of human existence. As a result, the Constitution
       protects an individual’s expectation that dignity will be
       preserved and respected throughout their life.

[p] xxx

[p] of-life decisions is ultimately a step towards ensuring
             that life does not despair of dignity as it ebbs away.

[p] xxx

[p] 75. The absence of safe and hygienic menstrual management
       measures undermines dignified existence by compelling theW.P. (C) No. 1000 of 2022                                   Page 50 of 126adolescent female students to either resort to absenteeism or
       adopt unsafe practices, or both, which violates the bodily
       autonomy of the menstruating girl children.

[p] ii. The right to privacy and decisional autonomy

[p] xxx

[p] xxx

[p] xxx

[p] 83. It   is     apposite   to   understand   that   menstrual   hygiene
       management is not confined to sanitation, it includes bodily
       autonomy and decisional freedom. The denial of adequate
       facilities, appropriate sanitary products, or privacy effectively
       compels a girl child to manage her body in a manner dictated by
       circumstance      rather    than   choice.     Autonomy    can   be
       meaningfully exercised only when girl children have access to
       functional toilets, adequate menstrual products, availability of
       water, and hygienic mechanisms for disposal.

[p] 25. Therefore, we hold that right to health, medical aid
             to protect the health and vigour of a worker while in
             service or post-retirement is a fundamental right underArticle 21, read withArticles 39(e), 41, 43, 48-Aand all
             related articles and fundamental human rights to make
             the life of the workman meaningful and purposeful with
             dignity of person.”
                                                 (Emphasis supplied)

[p] xxx

[p] dds-

[p] ny.un.org/doc/UNDOC/GEN/G16/089/32/PDF/G16
             08932.pdf?OpenElement>.]

[p] 92. Lack of knowledge about menstruation may lead to unhygienic
          and negative practices. This lack of body literacy contributes to
          a feeling of lack of bodily autonomy, more particularly, with
          regards to reproductive choices.

[p] 95. In such circumstancesreferred to above, it is the duty of the
         State to ensure the availability of MHM measures flows from the
         positive obligation embodied inArticle 15(3)of the Constitution.
         The Constitution expressly contemplates discrimination in
         favour of women and children, having due regard to their
         vulnerability, in order to safeguard their welfare and interests.
         This constitutional intent is also reflected inArticles 24and39(e)and (f) of the Constitution, respectively.15

[p] (Emphasis supplied)

[p] 97. The State’s obligation is heightened insofar as a girl child
       belonging to economically weaker sections is concerned. We say
       so because such students are placed in a position of coalescedW.P. (C) No. 1000 of 2022                                    Page 71 of 126vulnerability. The economic burden of sanitary products
          compounds the existing disadvantage of, first, being a girl in a
          structurally unequal society; secondly, having a biological
          process that requires management; and thirdly, lacking the
          financial means to manage that process in a safe and hygienic
          manner.

[p] opportunity for every individual to advance their human
       potential and pursue their social, economic, and legal interests.

[p] 101. Equality demands that it is not just recognized but reverberated
       throughout society.Articles 15and16of the Constitution
       respectively constitute a substantive framework of equality that
       goes beyond formal non-discrimination. It seeks to ensure
       meaningful participation of disadvantaged and marginalized
       communities in social, educational, and public life.

[p] 105. What is discernible from the aforesaid judgments
             is that though the courts have not expressly carved out
             a right to public participation, yet they have
             emphasized on the constitutional value of the same by
             associating it with the right to freedom of expression
             and the right to life. In our considered opinion,
             participation in public life is an important facet of the
             right to equality as well. The Constitution considers all
             the people to be equal citizens. The ability and choice
             to participate in public and social life without any fear
             of discrimination and ridicule, is a reflection of the
             same.

[p] 107. In a study17 conducted among students of classes sixth to eighth
          belonging to low-income households, the participants were given
          an opportunity to ask questions relating to menstruation. The
          study found that 18% of the participants raised questions
          concerning menstrual symptoms, while more than 17% of the


17Vikas Chothe, Jagdish Khubchandani, et.al., “Students’ Perceptions and Doubts About
Menstruation in Developing Countries: A Case Study From India” 15 Health Promotion
Practice 319-326 (2014).

[p] questions   pertained   to   myths   and   taboos   surrounding
       menstruation. These questions were related to restrictions on
       bathing, touching objects, leaving the house, visiting temples,
       and performing daily chores during menstruation. The students
       were seeking to understand the rationale behind such
       restrictions.

[p] 108. The researchers observed that adolescent girls lacked adequate
       awareness regarding menstruation, including the proper use
       and disposal of sanitary pads. The study revealed that of all the
       questions asked concerning the treatment of menstrual
       abnormalities, only one related to seeking medical assistance
       from a professional, while the remaining questions reflected
       reliance on home-based remedies. It concluded that illiteracy
       together with poverty was as a key factor contributing to taboos,
       unhealthy and harmful practices, leading to adverse health
       outcomes.

[p] 109. In our considered opinion, the study demonstrates a serious
       deficit in menstrual health knowledge among adolescent girls,
       particularly those from economically weaker sections. The
       prevalence and reliance on myths and taboos reflects not merely
       lack of information but the persistence of structural barriers
       which arise from stigma and stereotype.

[p] 115. It is in the same breath that we say that equality of opportunity
       entails removal of obstacles that impede the advancement of
       disadvantaged, more particularly in the present case, the
       women. The concept of substantive equality seeks to work on
       the factors causing discrimination. It intends to provide uniform
       opportunities to develop the desired skills to stand on an equal
       footing. It aims to equalize the starting point rather than the endW.P. (C) No. 1000 of 2022                                 Page 80 of 126result.18 To illustrate, when schools evaluate performance
          through written examinations, equality of opportunity would
          ensure that students with visual or learning disabilities are
          provided appropriate assistive devices, scribes, or additional
          time.

[p] 116. What is discernable from the aforesaid is that equality of
          opportunity necessitates that everyone has a fair chance to
          acquire the skills necessary for accessing benefits. This can be
          achieved only when structural impediments in acquiring such
          skills are eliminated. Equality of opportunity would help persons
          at   a    disadvantageous         position     to    overcome       structural
          discrimination.      When      equal opportunities are given, we
          recognize her right to choose and capability to choose. Hence,
          affording equal opportunity is an expression of treating a girl
          child equally.

[p] a. Accessibility of menstrual hygiene management measures
            – a step towards Social Justice

[p] 122. The aforesaid may be looked at from one another angle. Social
       justice seeks not merely absence of discrimination, but the
       creation of conditions through which substantive equality can
       be    attained.   These   conditions   are   opportunities,   more
       particularly, access to education for those who have been
       disadvantaged due to inherent factors.

[p] To the extent there was to be a conflict, on account of
             scarcity, it was certainly envisaged that the State
             would step in to ensure an equitable distribution in a
             manner that would be conducive to common good;
             nevertheless, if the State was to transgress beyond a
             certain limit, whereby the formal content of equalityW.P. (C) No. 1000 of 2022                                    Page 87 of 126was likely to be drastically abridged or truncated, the
             power of judicial review was to curtail it. However, as
             long as the policy initiatives of the State were in
             consonance with principles of equity and justice
             inherent within the equality code, and indeed even the
             freedom code, viaArticle 21's guarantee of the right to
             life, and for promotion of freedom of expression and
             thought, especially to promote excellence in our debates
             and arguments in the political sphere so that
             democratic richness could be better served, or were
             framed in pursuance of the directive principles of State
             policy, that were based on reasonable and intelligible
             classifications, the courts were to have no further place
             in entering the field of policy choices. The courts could
             of course, also, impose positive constitutional
             obligations on the State, where the abnegation of those
             positive and affirmative obligations, encoded within
             fundamental rights itself, were so gross as to constitute
             a fraud on the face of the Constitution.”

                                                (Emphasis supplied)

[p] 126. From the perspective of substantive equality, the absence of
       menstrual hygiene measures entrenches gendered disadvantage
       by converting a biological reality into a structural exclusion. The
       denial of basic enabling conditions, i.e., lack of clean and
       functional    washrooms,      menstrual      products,    disposal
       mechanism, and awareness about MHM measures, impedes not
       only a girl child’s right to participate in education, but also her
       right to opportunity to compete, to advance, and to realize her
       potential throughout her life. It is crucial to address these
       deficiencies to prevent temporary exclusion from turning it into
       permanent inequality.

[p] E. The fundamental right to education underArticle 21A“Education is what survives when what has been
                            learned has been forgotten.”

[p] 127. We wish to preface this part of our judgment with the
       enlightening words of B. F. Skinner emphasizing on the lasting
       impact of education. It seeks to convey that even when specific
       details are forgotten, the intellectual and moral development
       nurtured by education stays.

[p] 170. Time is over ripe that we recognize menstrual health as a shared
       responsibility rather than a woman’s issue. Awareness must not
       be limited to girls, but extends to boys, parents, and teachers.
       When menstruation is discussed openly in schools, it ceases to
       be a source of shame. It is recognized as what it is, a biological
       fact. Needless to say, it must be seen as a collective effort rather
       than a constitutional pull.

[p] 180. Before we part, we would like to say something on the issue we
       have addressed. This pronouncement is not just for the
       stakeholders of the legal system, it is also meant to be for the
       classroom where girls hesitate to ask for help, it is for the
       teachers who want to help but are restrained due to lack of
       resources, and it is for the parents who may not realize the
       impact of their silence, and for the society to establish that
       progress is measured how we protect the most vulnerable. We
       wish to communicate to every girl child, who might have become
       a victim of absenteeism because her body was perceived as a
       burden, that the fault is not hers. These words must travel
       beyond the courtroom, law review reports, and reach the
       everyday conscience of society at large.

[blockquote] The Right to Education (Art. 13of the Covenant), UN ESCOR, UN Doc E/C.12/1999/10 (Dec.
8,     1999),      available      at:     https://www.right-to-education.org/sites/right-to-
education.org/files/resource-attachments/CESCR_General_Comment_13_en.pdf.

[blockquote] rights and promote equality of educational opportunity. It calls
          upon the member States to formulate policies aimed at ensuring
          equality of opportunity and equality of treatment in education.
          It encourages making primary education free and compulsory,
          the availability and accessibility of secondary education to all,
          and the promotion of educational opportunities for persons who
          have either not received primary education or have been unable
          to complete it.

[blockquote] 23. The UNESCO highlights that the primary purpose of education
          is to enrich and empower an individual. Education helps shape
          a person’s understanding of the world, values, and identity. The
          Organization underscored that education provides for the
          development of knowledge and skills that helps one negotiate life
          and achieve goals. It is crucial to interact and shape the world
          around them. It was referred to as a ‘multiplier right’, meaning
          that it opens the gate to the enjoyment of other rights.4

[blockquote] 24. The       Convention        on     the    Elimination       of   All    Forms      of
          Discrimination against Women (CEDAW) mandates that State
          Parties take appropriate measures to eliminate discrimination
          against women in the field of education. It requires that equality
          must be ensured in access to pre-school, general, technical,
          professional and higher technical education. The Convention
          further obligates the State Parties to take effective steps to

[blockquote] https://www.right-to-education.org/sites/right-to-education.org/files/resource-
attachments/RTE-UNESCO_Right%20to%20education%20handbook_2019_En.pdf.

[blockquote] reduce female student drop-out rates, and actively work towards
         improving access to educational information necessary to
         safeguard the health and well-being of families.

[blockquote] 25. Similarly,Article 28of the Convention on the Rights of the Child
         (CRC) stipulates that State Parties recognize the right of every
         child to education. To give meaning to this right, the State
         Parties are obligated to encourage regular attendance at schools
         and to reduce drop-out rates. The Convention further mandates
         that the administration of the school must be in a manner that
         is consistent with the dignity of the child. In this regard, the
         State Parties affirm that education must be directed towards the
         holistic   development       of   the   child’s    personality,     more
         particularly, mental and physical abilities.

[blockquote] 26. The Committee on the Rights of the Child states that
         discrimination in education violates the human dignity of a child
         and undermines the capability of a child to benefit from
         educational     opportunities.     It   states    that   discriminatory
         practices include circumstances that limit a girl child’s
         participation in educational opportunities. It emphasizes that
         such practices impair a child’s growth to its fullest potential.5

[blockquote] 27. What flows from the aforesaid discussion is that while
         interpreting domestic laws it is important to keep in mind the

[blockquote] https://www.ohchr.org/en/resources/educators/human-rights-education-
training/general-comment-no-1-aims-education-article-29-2001.

[blockquote] commitments under various international treaties and interpret
          laws in a manner consistent with the international human rights
          standards.Article 51of the Constitution envisages that the
          State shall give due regard to international law and treaty
          obligations.

[blockquote] 28. This Court has, time and again, affirmed India’s obligation with
          regard to international laws and conventions.6 We shall discuss
          the application of the aforementioned treaties and conventions
          insofar as theRight of Children to Free and Compulsory
          Education Act, 2009(for short, “theRTE Act”), is concerned in
          the latter part of this judgment.

[blockquote] ii. Judicial recognition of education as a human right

[blockquote] 29. It is necessary for us to look into as to how the courts across the
          world have recognized the right to education as a basic human
          right. In Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka Shawnee
          County Kan Briggs, reported in 1954 SCC OnLine US SC 44,
          the Supreme Court of the United States was considering
          whether segregation of children in schools solely based on race
          meant depriving the minority group of equal educational
          opportunities. In this context, the Court highlighted the
          importance of education. The relevant observations read thus:-

[blockquote] “13. Today, education is perhaps the most important
                 function of state and local governments. Compulsory
                 school attendance laws and the great expenditures for
                 education both demonstrate our recognition of the


=== Respondent's Argument (4) ===

[p] 9.    We have perused the affidavit filed by the Union of India and the
          concerned       Ministries      in   pursuance        of   the    order     dated
          24.07.2023 passed by this Court. The respondent nos. 1 to 3
          respectively      admitted       that    menstruation         and     menstrual
          practices are clouded by taboos and socio-cultural restrictions
          for women as well as adolescent girls. It was acknowledged that
          there is a limited access to sanitary products and lack of safe
          sanitary facilities. It was recognized that unhealthy practices
          like using old clothes, ash, straw as menstrual absorbent which
          not only affect menstrual hygiene but also have long-lasting
          implication on the reproductive health.

[p] ii. Submissions on behalf of the States - Respondent Nos. 4
          to 39 respectively

[p] 46. Natural rights are not bestowed by the State. They
             inhere in human beings because they are human. They
             exist equally in the individual irrespective of class or
             strata, gender or orientation.

[p] 169. All that we are trying to convey is that, men have a multifaceted
       role in menstrual hygiene and awareness for school-going
       adolescent girls. On one hand, male teachers can integrate
       accurate, stigma-free information into lessons. At the same time,
       the staff would be responsive towards maintaining cleanliness
       and hygiene in toilets. On the other hand, peers and classmates
       would be empathetic and helpful.


=== Analysis of the law (71) ===

[p] 2 World Bank, Globally, periods are causing girls to be absent from school, 2016.
https://blogs.worldbank.org/en/education/globally-periods-are-causing-girls-be-absent-
school; World Economic Forum, 1 in 10 girls in Africa will drop out of school for this reason,
2015. https://www.weforum.org/stories/2015/12/1-in-10-girls-in-africa-will-drop-out-of-
school-for-this-reason/.

[p] 17. Education is a fundamental human right, as it ensures full and
       holistic development of a human being. It is a stepping stone
       towards realizing other human rights. Education is an integral
       part of dignity of a child. It is a right, not a charitable concession.
       It promotes the physical and cognitive development of a child. ItW.P. (C) No. 1000 of 2022                                    Page 14 of 126also contributes to the realization of the full potential of an
       individual. Most importantly, it shapes a person’s sense of
       identity and affiliation.

[p] 19. It is apposite to understand that the right to education does not
       exist in a vacuum. Education has a direct impact on an
       individual’s civil and political rights, cultural rights, and
       physical and emotional well-being. It influences a person’s
       ability to make healthier life choices, more particularly, to access
       and navigate the healthcare system, and to seek timely medical
       assistance. The right assumes importance in the case of girls,
       who occupy a comparatively disadvantaged position within
       familial and societal structures. Undeniably, the way our society
       perceives women directly translates into prejudice against the
       girl   child,   and   this   perpetuates   an   endless   cycle   of
       discrimination.

[p] i. Education - an essential human right in the International
            Human Rights Law framework

[p] 21.Article 26of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR)
          recognizes education as a universally protected fundamental
          human right. It stipulates that everyone has the right to
          education, and elementary education shall be compulsory.
          Further,Article 13of the International Covenant on Economic,
          Social and Cultural Rights (ICESCR) also recognizes the right to
          education for everyone. The General Comment onArticle 13of
          the ICESCR states that the article envisages non-discrimination
          and equal treatment in imparting education. 3 To this end, the
          ICESCR states that State Parties must include policies,
          programmes, and other practices to identify and take measures
          to redress any de facto discrimination.

[p] importance of education to our democratic society. It is
             required in the performance of our most basic public
             responsibilities, even service in the armed forces. It is
             the very foundation of good citizenship. Today it is a
             principal instrument in awakening the child to cultural
             values, in preparing him for later professional training,
             and in helping him to adjust normally to his
             environment. In these days, it is doubtful that any child
             may reasonably be expected to succeed in life if he is
             denied the opportunity of an education. Such an
             opportunity, where the state has undertaken to provide
             it, is a right which must be made available to all on
             equal terms.”
                                                 (Emphasis supplied)

[p] 42. While I join the Court's opinion, I do so without in
             any way retreating from my opinion in San Antonio
             Independent School District v. Rodriguez, 411 U.S. 1,
             70-133, 93 S.Ct. 1278, 1315-1348, 36 L.Ed.2d 16
             (1973) (dissenting opinion). I continue to believe that an
             individual's interest in education is fundamental, and
             that this view is amply supported "by the unique status
             accorded public education by our society, and by the
             close relationship between education and some of our
             most basic constitutional values." Id., at 111, 93 S.Ct.,
             at 1336. Furthermore, I believe that the facts of these
             cases demonstrate the wisdom of rejecting a rigidified
             approach to equal protection analysis, and of
             employing an approach that allows for varying levels of
             scrutiny depending upon "the constitutional and
             societal importance of the interest adversely affected
             and the recognized invidiousness of the basis upon
             which the particular classification is drawn." Id., at 99,
             93 S.Ct., at 1330. See also Dandridge v. Williams, 397
             U.S. 471, 519-521, 90 S.Ct. 1153, 1178-1180, 25
             L.Ed.2d 491 (1970) (MARSHALL, J., dissenting). It
             continues to be my view that a class-based denial of
             public education is utterly incompatible with the Equal
             Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment.”

                                                (Emphasis supplied)

[p] The three-pronged justice promised by the Preamble is
             only an illusion to the teaming millions who are
             illiterate. It is only education which equips a citizen to
             participate in achieving the objectives enshrined in the
             Preamble. The Preamble further assures the dignity of
             the individual. The Constitution seeks to achieve this
             object by guaranteeing fundamental rights to each
             individual which he can enforce through court of law if
             necessary. The Directive Principles in Part IV of the
             Constitution are also with the same objective. The
             dignity of man is inviolable. It is the duty of the State to
             respect and protect the same. It is primarily educationW.P. (C) No. 1000 of 2022                                    Page 24 of 126which brings forth the dignity of a man. The framers of
             the Constitution were aware that more than seventy
             per cent of the people, to whom they were giving the
             Constitution of India, were illiterate. They were also
             hopeful that within a period of ten years illiteracy
             would be wiped out from the country. It was with that
             hope thatArticles 41and45were brought in Chapter
             IV of the Constitution. An individual cannot be assured
             of human dignity unless his personality is developed
             and the only way to do that is to educate him. This is
             why the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 1948
             emphasises:“Education shall be directed to the full
             development of the human personality …”.Article 41in
             Chapter IV of the Constitution recognises an
             individual's right “to education”. It says that “the State
             shall, within the limits of its economic capacity and
             development, make effective provision for securing the
             right … to education …”. Although a citizen cannot
             enforce the Directive Principles contained in Chapter IV
             of the Constitution but these were not intended to be
             mere pious declarations. We may quote the words of Dr
             Ambedkar in that respect:

[p] 38. In the aforesaid context, if a State Party under the ICESR fails
       to discharge this minimum core obligation, it is considered to be
       in breach of the Covenant. Moreover, States could justify non-
       fulfilment of the obligations only by exhibiting that it made everyW.P. (C) No. 1000 of 2022                                   Page 29 of 126possible effort to utilize all resources at its disposal to fulfil these
       obligations. Thus, failure to meet the minimum core threshold
       deprives the right of its substantive meaning and reduces the
       right to dead letters.

[p] B. Substantive approach to right to equality in education
           underArticle 14of the Constitution

[p] 42. There is no doubt that the right to education loses its spirit if
       such conditions exist that exclude menstruating girl children
       from the educational process. As stated aforesaid, addressing
       the   impediments    through    affirmative   actions   would    be
       consistent with the substantive approach to equality embodied
       inArticle 14of the Constitution. In order to place a
       menstruating girl child on an equal footing with others, mere
       equal treatment would not suffice.

[p] 43. We shall now look into and discuss the substantive approach to
       the right to equality underArticle 14of the Constitution.Article
       14, in its traditional understanding, envisaged formal equality
       and guaranteed that likes would be treated alike. Under this
       formal conception of equality, although equality before the law
       and equal protection of the laws were guaranteed to all, yet
       inequality in the realization of other rights continued to persist.

[p] 44. The principle of substantive equality recognizes that once two
       individuals are placed in unequal positions because of social,
       economic, or cultural factors, mere equal “treatment” becomes
       inadequate. If two individuals are treated alike, without regard
       to their religion, race, caste, sex, or similar characteristics, the
       right to equality cannot be given its true effect. In other words,
       it cannot be given its true effect in the absence of taking intoW.P. (C) No. 1000 of 2022                                 Page 31 of 126consideration the position of the individual, which may be
          profoundly shaped by historical and structural disadvantages.
          Equal treatment afforded in isolation, or rather without
          accounting for such disadvantage, may perpetuate inequality.

[p] 45. Equality is not an abstract concept. It is embedded in social
          reality and must be responsive to those who are disadvantaged
          and marginalized. Equality entails not merely formal conferral
          of rights, but also the adoption of measures necessary to
          translate those rights into equality. 7 Substantive equality is
          brought into action through policies aiming to redress these
          systemic, direct or indirect disadvantages, by addressing the
          structural and contextual barriers that impede genuine equality.
          To put it briefly, it seeks to reduce the gap between
          disadvantages and the effective realization of rights.

[p] 51. In another research11 conducted to study school absenteeism
         during menstruation amongst adolescent school girls in North
         India, the researchers found that nearly one-third of girls were
         absent from school due to issues related to menstrual health,
         restrictive societal norms, and inadequate menstrual hygiene
         management. Out of approximately 500 students, 29.2% of the
         participants were reported to be absent from school during
         menstruation.

[p] students in government schools were more likely to be absent as
       compared to those in private schools. Notably, girls using
       hygienic methods reported lower absenteeism as compared to
       others. To address the aforesaid issues, the researchers
       recommended integrating comprehensive menstrual health
       education into school curricula and improving access to
       hygienic menstrual products.

[p] 53. Accessibility of MHM measures provides the same opportunities
       for all students in school, while recognizing unequal distribution
       of resources with the objective to attain equal access to human
       rights. In other words, it levels the playing field by addressing
       unequal starting points.

[p] [ Nivedita Menon (Ed.), Ratna Kapur and Benda
             Cossman “On Women, Equality and the Constitution :

[p] C. The right to dignified menstrual health a part of Article21i. The right to human dignity as a concomitant of the right
            to life

[p] 69. The right to life underArticle 21means a life with dignity. This
         Court, in a catena of decisions, has consistently recognized that
         dignity is an essential and inseparable facet of the right to life
         and liberty. The right to life means more than mere survival.
         Every human possesses inherent dignity by virtue of being
         human, which enables the individual to make self-determining
         choices. This Court has recognized dignity to be intrinsic and
         inalienable continuing beyond biological existence. 13

[p] These constitutional precepts exist in unity to facilitate
             a humane and compassionate society. The individual
             is the focal point of the Constitution because it is in the
             realisation of individual rights that the collective well-
             being of the community is determined. Human dignityW.P. (C) No. 1000 of 2022                                   Page 46 of 126is an integral part of the Constitution. Reflections of
             dignity are found in the guarantee against
             arbitrariness (Article 14), the lamps of freedom (Article

[p] 19) and in the right to life and personal liberty (Article

[p] 21).

[p] 42. India is constituted into a sovereign, democratic
                republic to secure to all its citizens, fraternity
                assuring the dignity of the individual and the unity
                of the nation. The sovereign, democratic republic
                exists to promote fraternity and the dignity of the
                individual citizen and to secure to the citizens
                certain rights. This is because the objectives of the
                State can be realised only in and through the
                individuals. Therefore, rights conferred on citizens
                and non-citizens are not merely individual or
                personal rights. They have a large social and
                political content, because the objectives of the
                Constitution cannot be otherwise realised.”
                                                    (emphasis supplied)W.P. (C) No. 1000 of 2022                                    Page 47 of 126

[p] 119. To live is to live with dignity. The draftsmen of the
             Constitution defined their vision of the society in which
             constitutional values would be attained by
             emphasising, among other freedoms, liberty and
             dignity. So fundamental is dignity that it permeates the
             core of the rights guaranteed to the individual by Part
             III. Dignity is the core which unites the fundamental
             rights because the fundamental rights seek to achieve
             for each individual the dignity of existence. Privacy
             with its attendant values assures dignity to the
             individual and it is only when life can be enjoyed with
             dignity can liberty be of true substance. Privacy
             ensures the fulfilment of dignity and is a core value
             which the protection of life and liberty is intended to
             achieve.”
                                                   (Emphasis supplied)

[p] 518. Constitutional recognition of the dignity of
             existence as an inseparable element of the right to life
             necessarily means that dignity attaches throughout the
             life of the individual. Every individual has a
             constitutionally protected expectation that the dignity
             which attaches to life must subsist even in the
             culminating phase of human existence. Dignity of life
             must encompass dignity in the stages of living which
             lead up to the end of life. Dignity in the process of dying
             is as much a part of the right to life underArticle 21.To
             deprive an individual of dignity towards the end of life
             is to deprive the individual of a meaningful existence.
             Hence, the Constitution protects the legitimate
             expectation of every person to lead a life of dignity until
             death occurs;”
                                                   (Emphasis supplied)

[p] 74. In our considered view, MHM measures are inseparable from the
       right to live with dignity underArticle 21.We say so because
       dignity cannot be reduced to an abstract ideal, it must find
       expression in conditions that enable individuals to live without
       humiliation, exclusion, or avoidable suffering. For menstruating
       girl children, the inaccessibility of MHM measures subjects them
       to stigma, stereotyping, and humiliation.

[p] 118. Life is precious in itself. But life is worth living
             because of the freedoms which enable each individual
             to live life as it should be lived. The best decisions on
             how life should be lived are entrusted to the individual.
             They are continuously shaped by the social milieu in
             which individuals exist. The duty of the State is to
             safeguard the ability to take decisions — the autonomy
             of the individual — and not to dictate those decisions.
             “Life” within the meaning ofArticle 21is not confined
             to the integrity of the physical body. The right
             comprehends one's being in its fullest sense. That
             which facilitates the fulfilment of life is as much within
             the protection of the guarantee of life.

[p] 320. Privacy is a constitutionally protected right which
             emerges primarily from the guarantee of life and
             personal liberty inArticle 21of the Constitution.

[p] Elements of privacy also arise in varying contexts from
             the other facets of freedom and dignity recognised and
             guaranteed by the fundamental rights contained in
             Part III.”
                                                (Emphasis supplied)

[p] iii. The right to menstrual health as a facet of the right to
           life

[p] 84. The aforesaid may be looked at from one another angle.Article
       21recognizes the right to health. Health is defined as a state of
       physical, mental, and social well-being and not merely the
       absence of disease or infirmity. By necessary implication, this
       right will impliedly extend to the right of a menstruating girl
       child to access MHM practices to attain the highest standard ofW.P. (C) No. 1000 of 2022                                  Page 57 of 126sexual and reproductive health. They are intertwined in such a
       manner that one cannot survive without the other. The right to
       reproductive health implies that an adolescent female student
       should have access to safe, effective, and affordable MHM
       measures.

[p] 85. There is a legion of decisions of this Court which lays down that
       the right to health is an integral facet of the meaningful right to
       life underArticle 21of the Constitution, and obligations of the
       State in this regard. We need not discuss all the decisions, but
       rather intend to refer and rely upon only a few of them.

[p] Provision for medical test and treatment invigorates the
             health of the worker for higher production or efficient
             service. Continued treatment, while in service or after
             retirement is a moral, legal and constitutional
             concomitant duty of the employer and the State.
             Therefore, it must be held that the right to health and
             medical care is a fundamental right underArticle 21read withArticles 39(e), 41and43of the Constitution
             and make the life of the workman meaningful and
             purposeful with dignity of person. Right to life includes
             protection of the health and strength of the worker and
             is a minimum requirement to enable a person to live
             with human dignity. The State, be it Union or State
             Government or an industry, public or private, is
             enjoined to take all such actions which will promote
             health, strength and vigour of the workman during the
             period of employment and leisure and health even after
             retirement as basic essentials to live the life with health
             and happiness. The health and strength of the worker
             is an integral facet of right to life. Denial thereof
             denudes the workman the finer facets of life violatingArticle 21.The right to human dignity, development of
             personality, social protection, right to rest and leisure
             are fundamental human rights to a workman assured
             by the Charter of Human Rights, in the Preamble andArticles 38and39of the Constitution. Facilities for
             medical care and health to prevent sickness ensures
             stable manpower for economic development and would
             generate devotion to duty and dedication to give the
             workers' best physically as well as mentally in
             production of goods or services. Health of the worker
             enables him to enjoy the fruits of his labour, keepingW.P. (C) No. 1000 of 2022                                   Page 63 of 126him physically fit and mentally alert for leading a
             successful life, economically, socially and culturally.
             Medical facilities to protect the health of the workers
             are, therefore, the fundamental and human rights to
             the workmen.

[p] ny.un.org/doc/UNDOC/GEN/G16/089/32/PDF/G16
             08932.pdf?OpenElement>.]          The    Committee    on
             Economic, Social and Cultural Rights in General
             Comment No. 22 on the Right to Sexual and
             Reproductive Health underArticle 12of the
             International Covenant on Economic, Social and
             Cultural Rights [ India ratified this Convention on 10-4-
             1979.] observed that “The right to sexual and
             reproductive health is an integral part of the right of
             everyone to the highest attainable physical and mental
             health.” [ General Comment No. 22 (2016) on the Right
             to Sexual and Reproductive Health (Article 12of the
             International Covenant on Economic, Social andW.P. (C) No. 1000 of 2022                                 Page 65 of 126Cultural Rights), E/C.12/GC/22 <https://documents-

[p] 93. The above conspectus of cases reveals that the State bears a
          positive obligation underArticle 21to protect the right to health,
          more particularly, the menstrual health of girl children. The
          State is required to undertake effective measures to ensure the
          availability of, and enhance access to MHM products. We say so
          because the lack of access to such products impedes the
          physical well-being,       dignity,    and    overall development         of
          menstruating girl children.

[p] “7. The insertion of clause (3) ofArticle 15in relation to
             women is a recognition of the fact that for centuries,
             women of this country have been socially and
             economically handicapped. As a result, they are unable
             to participate in the socio-economic activities of the
             nation on a footing of equality. It is in order to eliminate
             this socio-economic backwardness of women and to
             empower them in a manner that would bring about
             effective equality between men and women thatArticle
             15(3)is placed inArticle 15.Its object is to strengthen
             and improve the status of women.[…]

[p] 8. What then is meant by “any special provision for
             women” inArticle 15(3)?This “special provision”, which
             the State may make to improve women's participation
             in all activities under the supervision and control of the
             State can be in the form of either affirmative action or
             reservation. It is interesting to note that the same
             phraseology finds a place inArticle 15(4)which deals
             with any special provision for the advancement of any
             socially or educationally backward class of citizens or
             Scheduled Castes or Scheduled Tribes.[…]

             This Court has, therefore, clearly considered the scope
             ofArticle 15(4)as wider thanArticle 16(4)covering
             within it several kinds of positive action programmes in
             addition to reservations. It has, however, added a word
             of caution by reiterating M.R. Balaji [1963 Supp 1 SCR
             439 : AIR 1963 SC 649] to the effect that a special
             provision contemplated byArticle 15(4)like reservation
             of posts and appointments contemplated byArticle
             16(4), must be within reasonable limits. These limits of
             reservation have been broadly fixed at 50% at the
             maximum. The same reasoning would apply toArticle
             15(3)which is worded similarly.

[p] 98. Furthermore, to secure the right to health is not merely a right
          enshrined underArticle 21but also a duty on the State underArticle 47of the Constitution.Article 47enjoins the State to
          improve public health as its primary duty. No doubt the
          Government is rendering this obligation by providing MHM
          measures but in order to make it meaningful, it has to be reach
          of the beneficiaries. Thus, it is only then the objectives of the
          State can be realized. As is always said, the rights conferred on
          citizens and non-citizens are not merely individual or personal
          rights. They have a large social and political content, because
          the objectives of the Constitution cannot be otherwise realized. 16


          D. The right to participation and the equality of opportunity
             respectively as constitutional guarantees under Article14

[p] i. Lack of menstrual hygiene measures as a barrier in
          exercising the right to participate in school

[p] 100. The right to equality includes, or rather is expressed through the
       right to be able to participate on equal terms in community and
       society.   Substantive   equality   requires   that    voice   and
       participation is enhanced in order to counter exclusion. We say
       so because providing equal opportunities equalizes the starting
       point so that all participants can compete on the same terms.
       As a sequitur, deprivation of opportunities to pursue one’s
       valued choices puts one at a disadvantageous position. Thus,
       without affording participation on equal footing, equality would
       be nothing more than lip service.

[p] 109. The aforesaid expositions leave no manner of
             doubt in our minds that the right to participation is an
             embodiment of the constitutional vision of equal
             opportunity and dignity for all. The said right finds its
             roots in the right to freedom of expression and is
             shaped by the constitutional mandate of substantive
             equality with the end goal of affording the marginalized
             sections of the society a meaningful life in terms ofArticle 21of the Constitution.”
                                                 (Emphasis supplied)W.P. (C) No. 1000 of 2022                                 Page 76 of 126

[p] ii. Secondly, realizing equal opportunities, i.e., it is not
           sufficient to acknowledge that the starting point shall be
           same; the process of being able to access the opportunities
           is equally important. In this regard, any impediment that
           might interfere with the process should be eliminated.
        iii. Thirdly, recognizing and respecting people’s potential, i.e.,
           natural differences must be respected as normal and
           reasonable. This seeks to addresses social and historical
           constraints.

[p] 8-2009, which became effective from 1-4-2010. The
             Object and Reasons of the Act declared loud and clear
             that what the Act seeks to achieve is not merely “free”
             and “compulsory” elementary education, but equally
             important would be the “Quality” of this education! The
             Preamble to the Act states “that every child has a right
             to be provided full-time elementary education of
             satisfactory and equitable “quality” in a formal school
             which satisfies certain essential norms and
             standards”.

[p] executing. It finds its concrete expression through theRTE Act.

[p] 134. The focus of theRTE Actis to make education accessible by
       providing elementary education of satisfactory and equitable
       quality.The Actcasts an obligation on the Government to
       provide and ensure admission, attendance and completion of
       elementary education. It envisages that no child shall be made
       to pay any kind of fee or expenses which may prevent it from
       pursuing and completing elementary education.

[p] *****
             [(3) A child with disability referred to in sub-clause (A)
             of clause (ee) ofsection 2shall, without prejudice to the
             provisions of the Persons withDisabilities (Equal
             Opportunities, Protection of Rights and Full
             Participation) Act, 1995(1 of 1996), and a child referred
             to in sub-clauses (B) and (C) of clause (ee) ofsection 2,
             have the same rights to pursue free and compulsory
             elementary education which children with disabilities
             have under the provisions of Chapter V of the Persons
             withDisabilities (Equal Opportunities, Protection of
             Rights and Full Participation) Act, 1995:

[p] “150. Upon a holistic reading ofSections 3,8and12(1)(c), it is apparent that the obligations of the State
             as well as private unaided schools under theRTE Act,
             2009are to the students studying in government
             schools and 25% EWS/DG students except for fee
             paying students.

[p] 156. The argument that private unaided schools are
             required to provide equipment to EWS/DG students
             only if they are providing such equipment to the 75%
             fee paying students is mis-conceived.Section 12(1)(c)requires private unaided schools to inter alia provide
             free and compulsory elementary education to 25%
             EWS/DG             students;         which         means
             education sans financial barrier viz-a-viz those things
             which are indispensable for access to elementary
             education.Section 12(1)(c)obligation is in no way
             dependent upon what school gives to the fee paying
             children, free or otherwise. The equipment in question
             is indispensable/mandatory for the purpose of
             accessing and availing elementary education through
             online means and therefore has to be provided free of
             cost underSection 12(1)(c). Moreover, everything which
             is necessary for pursuing and completing elementary
             education which fee paying students are also required
             to have, are not provided free to such students.[…].

[p] 161. In order to address this discrimination and fulfill
             their obligations, the private unaided schools underSection 12(1)(c)and Government schools like Kendriya
             Vidyalayas underSection 3(2)of RTE Act, 2009 are
             directed to provide equipment of optimum configuration
             which is sufficient to enable EWS/DG students to get
             access to online learning.”
                                                 (Emphasis supplied)

[p] 144. What flows from the aforesaid discussion is thatSection 3of the
       RTE Act is not restricted to the formal entitlement of enrolment
       in a school. The right it guarantees is one of effective and
       continuous access to education.Section 3incorporates the
       requirement that education shall be provided in conditions
       consistent with dignity and equality. The absence of sanitary
       napkins and safe disposal mechanisms compels menstruating
       girls to stay away from school for several days each month.
       When such circumstances continue to persist, it is an indication
       that the State has failed in ensuring regular attendance and
       continuity of education. This results in direct denial of the right
       guaranteed underSection 3.

[p] b. Menstrual management measures as mandatory “norms
          and standards” for schools underSection 19of the RTE
          Act

[p] 147.Section 18of the RTE Act states that no school, i.e., a school not
       established,    owned,     or   controlled   by   the   appropriate
       Government or the local authority, shall be established or
       function, without obtaining a certificate of recognition from the
       District Education Officer. For such a school to be recognized, it
       is necessary that it, inter alia, fulfils norms and standards
       specified inSection 19.

[p] 148. Sub-section (3) ofSection 18provides that, upon contravention
       of the conditions of recognition, which include adherence to theW.P. (C) No. 1000 of 2022                                Page 104 of 126prescribed norms and standards, the competent authority may
       withdraw such recognition. Further, from the date of withdrawal
       of the recognition, the school ceases to be entitled to continue
       functioning. Any continuance thereafter would render the school
       liable to a fine prescribed under sub-section (5) ofSection 18.

[p] 150.Section 19of the RTE Act stipulates that schools which are not
       established,   owned,     or      controlled    by   the   appropriate
       Government or the local authority shall not be established and
       granted a certificate of recognition unless they fulfil the norms
       and standards set out in the Schedule. This stipulation applies
       irrespective of whether the school is a Government school or a
       private   school.    In   other     words,     the   section   operates
       independently ofSection 18.

[p] 151. The net effect of the aforesaid is that every school, whether
       Government-run or privately managed, must act in accordance
       with the norms and standardslaid down inSection 19of the
       RTE Act.The RTE Actexpressly provides consequences in the
       event of non-compliance by schools that are not established,
       owned, or controlled by the appropriate Government or a local
       authority. Insofar as schools established, owned, or controlled
       by the appropriate Government or a local authority are
       concerned, non-compliance with the norms and standards
       would amount to a contravention attributable to the State itself.

[p] 175. The aforementioned action taken by the DEO must be in
       accordance withSection 18of the RTE Act read with Rule 16 of
       the RTE Rules. Additionally, for the purpose of ensuring that
       transparency and accountability is fixed on part of both the DEO
       and the concerned school respectively, the DEO must annex a
       copy of the report of the periodic inspection and a copy of the
       consolidated responses received from the student survey along
       with the notice which is to be issued under Rule 16(1)(a) of the
       RTE Rules.

[blockquote] “In enacting this Part of the Constitution, the
                 Assembly is giving certain directions to the future
                 legislature and the future executive to show in what
                 manner they are to exercise the legislative and the
                 executive power they will have. Surely it is not the
                 intention to introduce in this Part these principles as
                 mere pious declarations. It is the intention of the
                 Assembly that in future both the legislature and the
                 executive should not merely pay lip service to these
                 principles but that they should be made the basis of
                 all legislative and executive action that they may be
                 taking hereafter in the matter of the governance of
                 the country.”
                                               (C.A.D. Vol. VII, p. 476)”

                                                  (Emphasis supplied)

[blockquote] 33. A Constitution Bench inUnni Krishnan, J.P. v. State of A.P.,
       reported in (1993) 1 SCC 645, affirmed the abovementionedW.P. (C) No. 1000 of 2022                                   Page 25 of 126observations inMohini Jain(supra) to the extent that the right
       to education has always been regarded as fundamentally
       important to human life. The Court observed that the country
       would be unable to achieve the objectives set forth in the
       Preamble without education. The relevant observations read
       thus:-

[blockquote] “Article 21 and Right to Education:

[blockquote] 166. In Bandhua Mukti Morcha [(1984) 3 SCC 161 :

[blockquote] 1984 SCC (L&S) 389] this Court held that the right to
             life guaranteed byArticle 21does take in “educational
             facilities”. (The relevant portion has been quoted
             hereinbefore.) Having regard to the fundamental
             significance of education to the life of an individual and
             the nation, and adopting the reasoning and logic
             adopted in the earlier decisions of this Court referred to
             hereinbefore, we hold, agreeing with the statement
             in Bandhua Mukti Morcha [(1984) 3 SCC 161 : 1984
             SCC (L&S) 389] that right to education is implicit in and
             flows from the right to life guaranteed byArticle 21.That the right to education p has been treated as one of
             transcendental importance in the life of an individual
             has been recognised not only in this country since
             thousands of years, but all over the world.InMohini
             Jain [Mohini Jain v. State of Karnataka, (1992) 3 SCC
             666] the importance of education has been duly and
             rightly stressed. The relevant observations have
             already been set out in para 7 hereinbefore. In
             particular, we agree with the observation that without
             education being provided to the citizens of this country,
             the objectives set forth in the Preamble to the
             Constitution cannot be achieved. The Constitution
             would fail. We do not think that the importance of
             education could have been better emphasised than in
             the above words.[…]”
                                                  (Emphasis supplied)W.P. (C) No. 1000 of 2022                                  Page 26 of 126

[blockquote] 34.   Although the 11 judge Bench inT.M.A Pai Foundation v. State
        of Karnataka, reported in (2002) 8 SCC 481, overruled the
        decision inUnni Krishnan(supra) insofar as the framing of the
        scheme qua grant of admission and the fixation of the fee, yet
        the observation that primary education is a fundamental right
        was affirmed.

[blockquote] 35. We may also look into the decision in the case of Minister of
        Health v. Treatment Action Campaign, reported in 2002 SCC
        OnLine ZACC 17, wherein the Constitutional Court of South
        Africa recognized the concept of “minimum core” developed by
        the ICESR. The minimum core concept ensures that certain
        essential levels of each right, such as access to basic education,
        primary healthcare, food, shelter, and dignity, must be
        guaranteed immediately. The ICESR recognizes that although
        realization of rights may be subject to resources, yet it obligates
        State Parties to secure the minimum essential content of the
        rights.

[blockquote] 36.InR.D. Upadhyay v. State of A.P., reported in (2007) 15 SCC
        337, a fervent appeal was made to this Court to issue directions
        for the development of children of those mothers who were either
        undertrial prisoners or convicts. In such circumstances, this
        Court directed that adequate arrangements shall be made
        available in all jails to impart education to children of female
        prisoners. What has been conveyed by this Court in so many
        words is the understanding of education as a continuing andW.P. (C) No. 1000 of 2022                                  Page 27 of 126non-derogable right that cannot be denied even within the
        confines of a prison.

[blockquote] 37.   The Constitutional Court of South Africa in Governing Body of
        the Juma Musjid Primary School v. Ahmed Asruff Essay
        N.O., reported in 2011 SCC OnLine ZACC 13, underscored the
        importance of education in an appeal assailing an order
        authorizing the eviction of a public school from a private
        property. To put it in simple words, the Court was addressing a
        conflict between the right to education and the right to property.

[blockquote] Through the Looking Glass of Feminism in Gender and
             Politics in India” (1993).] The disadvantage must be
             addressed not by treating a woman as “weak” but by
             construing her entitlement to an equal citizenship. The
             former legitimises patronising attitudes towards
             women. The latter links true equality to the realisation
             of dignity. The focus of such an approach is not simply
             on equal treatment under the law, but rather on the real
             impact of the legislation. [ Maureen Maloney, “An
             Analysis of Direct Taxes in India : A Feminist
             Perspective”, Journal of the Indian Law Institute
             (1988).] Thus, Section 497 has to be examined in theW.P. (C) No. 1000 of 2022                                  Page 36 of 126light of existing social structures which enforce the
             position of a woman as an unequal participant in a
             marriage.”
                                               (Emphasis supplied)

[blockquote] Provided that a child with “multiple disabilities”
             referred to in clause (h) and a child with “severe
             disability” referred to in clause (o) ofsection 2of the
             National Trust for Welfare of Persons with Autism,
             Cerebral Palsy, Mental Retardation and Multiple
             Disabilities Act, 1999 (44 of 1999) may also have the
             right to opt for home-based education.]”
                                                    (Emphasis is ours)

[blockquote] 140. The word expression “to pay any kind of fee or charges or
       expenses” inSection 3(2)is not only restricted to school fees but
       also includes all kinds of charges or expenses that would prevent
       a child from pursuing as well as completing elementary
       education. For instance, expenses relating to washroomW.P. (C) No. 1000 of 2022                                  Page 100 of 126facilities, uniform charges, maintenance of the bus service,
          electricity charges, medical assistance21, books and school
          essential charges.

[blockquote] 141.In Society forUnaided Private Schools of Rajasthan(supra),
          the object ofSection 3(2)was identified as removing a financial
          barrier which prevents a child from accessing education. Thus,
          it was held that no child shall be asked to pay any kind of fee or
          charges which may prevent him or her from pursuing
          elementary education.

[blockquote] 142. In Justice for All v. State (NCT of Delhi), reported in 2020
          SCC OnLine Del 1217, the Delhi High Court was dealing with
          a PIL seeking the supply of free devices to children belonging to
          EWS/DG in order to enable them to attend classes by way of
          video conferencing.


=== Petitioner's Argument (1) ===

[p] Respondent no. 6 - Bihar
         Mukhyamantri        Sanitary  Train girls about menstrual health and
            Kishori         napkins +  hygiene, impart proper understanding of
           Swasthya         Awareness  use of sanitary napkins.
          Karyakram
         Department of    Sanitary   Free sanitary napkins to girl students
          Education       napkins    between the age 12-18 years.


=== Conclusion (82) ===

[p] 82. What emerges from the foregoing discussion is that a girl child’s
       expectation to manage her menstruation in privacy with dignity
       is legitimate. In such circumstances, the lack of resources
       cannot be permitted to govern her autonomy over her own body.
       There is no doubt that she possesses the right to decide how and
       where menstrual care is carried out, and the liberty to exercise
       such care, free from coercive practices and social restrictions.

[p] (ii) Right to reproductive health

[p] resort to unhygienic alternatives such as rags or cloth, or use of
         menstrual absorbents for prolonged periods, all of which have
         demonstrably adverse consequences for their health. In schools
         where there are no separate washrooms for girl students, they
         would have to use male washrooms or the one which is used by
         all the students, where they are prone to harassment or sexual
         assault.

[p] xxx

[p] 106. The aforesaid expositions leave no manner of doubt in our minds
          that the right to participation recognizes that individuals are
          inherently social, and for a dignified life, one shall have the
          ability to participate on equal terms in community. Juxtaposing
          this logic, the absence of access to education restricts an
          individual from participating fully and effectively in democratic,
          social, and economic life.

[p] 110. The lack of MHM measures acts as a significant barrier to girls’
       participation in school. Even within educational institutions,
       menstruation is beset by stigma, stereotype, and neglect. WhenW.P. (C) No. 1000 of 2022                               Page 78 of 126schools fail to provide clean washrooms, required menstrual
       absorbents, safe disposal mechanisms, girl children would be
       compelled to either absent themselves or drop-out from school.
       In both scenarios, her right to participate in schooling, sports,
       extra-curricular activities are jeopardized.

[p] 111. As a result, lack of these measures directly impairs her
       participation in school. Such conditions ultimately affect her
       regular attendance and equal involvement in schooling.
       Needless to say, participation in education is not limited to
       physical presence in the classroom, it encompasses the ability
       to attend school, more particularly, having the choice to attend
       the school, concentrate during lessons, and take part in
       academic and co-curricular activities on an equal footing with
       peers.

[p] 112. In the absence of clean and functional washrooms, girl children
       would be unable to manage menstruation with privacy and
       dignity in school. This will put her in constant anxiety of leakage,
       staining clothes, and exposure to embarrassment. It is this fear
       which discourages her from attending school altogether.
       Similarly, lack of access to menstrual absorbents affects
       participation by making it practically unfeasible for girls to
       remain in school for long hours or actively participate.

[p] 113. Further, when schools fail in providing appropriate disposal
       facilities, girls would be forced to carry used menstrual products
       with them, or dispose of them in unsafe or undignified ways. TheW.P. (C) No. 1000 of 2022                                 Page 79 of 126fear of being ridiculed lingers and creates a disincentive to
       attend school during this time. The lack of awareness and
       education regarding menstruation exacerbates these barriers by
       fostering stigma and silence within school spaces. Where
       menstruation is not openly acknowledged or discussed, girls are
       less likely to seek support from teachers or peers.

[p] ii. Lack of menstrual hygiene management measures
            impede the equality of opportunity

[p] 19 Zhongmin Wu, Why is Social Justice Possible? Social Justice Issues during China’s Period

of Transition (Springer Nature, Singapore, 2024).

[p] expectations of those with identical abilities shall not be
           influenced by one’s social class.

[p] 119. The absence of MHM measures does not merely disrupt a girl
       child’s presence in school. It impairs her access to opportunities
       both during schooling and later in life. As stated aforesaid,
       equality of opportunity is concerned with conditions that enable
       an individual to participate and compete on equal terms. When
       such conditions are absent, naturally, an individual is put at a
       disadvantageous position.

[p] 120. The absence of MHM measures at school would lead to recurrent
       absenteeism which would result in gap in learning. Over the
       period of time, these gaps would translate into lower academic
       performance,    and    reduced    participation   in   classroom.
       Opportunities for academic development, such as participation
       in competitions, sports or leadership roles, inevitably get
       disturbed.

[p] 123. Social justice would be achieved through continuous removal of
       injustice and inequity in society. It requires efforts to correct
       structural    and    historical   disadvantages     that   prevent
       participating on equal terms. Any effort towards social justice is
       an act towards inclusion. The acts by the State adopting
       affirmative measures, namely, welfare schemes, beneficial
       legislations, are attributable to promoting social justice. Thus,W.P. (C) No. 1000 of 2022                                 Page 84 of 126social justice is not a static idea but a continuous process
       towards achieving a just and equitable society.

[p] 129. Thereafter,Article 21Acame into effect on 01.04.2010 along
       with theRTE Actwith the avowed objective to provide free and
       compulsory education to all children of the age six to fourteen
       years.

[p] (Emphasis supplied)

[p] xxx

[p] i. Right to free and compulsory education under the RTE
          Act

[p] 137. It can be safely concluded that quality of education goes beyond
          textbooks, teachers, or classrooms. It includes all the conditions
          that enable effective learning and continuity of schooling.
          Inaccessibility       of    MHM        disrupts       attendance,        hinders
          concentration, and consequently, breaks the continuity of
          schooling.

[p] xxx

[p] xxx

[p] 145. One another good reason to hold the aforesaid is that education
       underSection 3must be free. Free education means that no
       child should be required to incur expenditure that becomes a
       barrier to accessing education. When this expenditure leads toW.P. (C) No. 1000 of 2022                               Page 103 of 126absenteeism or drop-out, the State’s inaction converts a
       guaranteed right into a conditional one.

[p] 149. In the aforesaid context, it would be apposite to look at Rule 15
       of the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education
       Rules, 2010 (for short, “the RTE Rules”), which prescribes that
       every school that had made a self-declaration within three
       months of the commencement of the Act had to conform to, inter
       alia, the values enshrined in the Constitution. Further, sub-rule
       (6) of Rule 15 stipulates that schools that do not conform to the
       norms, standards, and conditions mentioned in the Schedule
       within three years from the commencement of theRTE Actshall
       cease to function. Furthermore, in order to be recognized, every
       school established after the commencement of theRTE Actis
       required to conform to the same norms, standards, and
       conditions.

[p] 152. We take notice of the building norms and standards listed in theSchedule to the RTE Act. It reads thus:-

[p] 153. We shall clarify that the expression “barrier-free access” to a
       school building is not confined to the structural design of the
       building alone but extends equally to the amenities and facilitiesW.P. (C) No. 1000 of 2022                                 Page 106 of 126within it. Barrier-free access signifies that schools are required
       to identify and remove all impediments that obstruct access to
       education, whether by eliminating physical barriers or by
       adopting affirmative measures necessary to secure the effective
       realization of barrier-free access to education. Nothing within
       the school shall prevent a student from attending school, and/or
       once entered, from remaining in school for the full duration
       necessary to meaningfully participate in educational activities.

[p] To curb such problems, State should provide efficient
             and sufficient infrastructure. Apart from that, the State
             shall also set-up an alternative and innovative school
             education as well as bring back them to have
             education. State can involve those Shiksha Mitras to
             educate them and/or also inculcate awareness
             amongst the dropout children and their parents so that
             children may attend the school regularly for having
             education then only actual object of SSA and RTE act,
             will be fulfilled.”
                                                (Emphasis supplied)

[p] F. Role of Men in Menstruation

[p] 164. At this stage, we would like to emphasize on the role young boys
       and male teachers play in the life of adolescent girl students. We
       have no hesitation in saying that if the spirit of Article 21A and
       the RTE Actis to be achieved in its fullest sense, it would not beW.P. (C) No. 1000 of 2022                                  Page 115 of 126sufficient that merely gender-segregated toilets or sanitary
       napkins are provided. We say so because this is far more than
       an infrastructural problem. The absence of menstrual hygiene
       facilities in schools is not the only barrier that impedes
       education but rather it is only half the problem. More often than
       not, the environment within which the girl child is acquiring
       education, is equally impeding, if not a greater barrier.

[p] 165. Undoubtedly, laws have the power to shape and influence social
       behaviour and bring forth transformative change. However, we
       must also acknowledge the grim reality that the implementation
       of these laws faces several challenges arising from deep-rooted
       attitudes and norms which our society is unwilling to break
       away from.

[p] 166. A school may have adequate facilities for menstrual hygiene, but
       an unsupportive, rather hostile and stigmatized environment
       would render them of no use. The environment at school is not
       a monolith of females, it consists of young boys, male teachers,
       and male staff. Until the whole ecosystem is sterilized of the
       stigma associated with menstruation, the infrastructural efforts
       would remain underutilized.

[p] 167. Menstruation should not be a topic that is only shared in
       hushed whispers. It is crucial that boys are educated about the
       biological reality of menstruation. A male student, unsensitized
       towards the issue, may harass a menstruating girl child which
       may discourage her from attending school.

[p] 168. In this context, the responsibility weighs even heavier on the
       male teachers. They must be sensitized to the needs of a girl
       child. For instance, a request to the restroom or the sudden need
       to leave the classroom must be treated with sensitivity rather
       than straight dismissal or invasive questioning. To put briefly,
       we would say, ignorance breeds insensitivity, knowledge breeds
       empathy.

[p] 171. We acknowledge and appreciate the efforts on part of the Union
       and States to undertake awareness and training programmes for
       teachers,   and      implement   capacity-building     programme.

[p] However, one swallow does not make the summer. These
       initiatives are uneven and what is lacking is an active monitoring
       mechanism to oversee implementation.

[p] VI. CONCLUSION

[p] 172. A conspectus of the aforesaid detailed discussion on theArticles
       14, 21and21Aof the Constitution, respectively, and theRTE
       Actis as follows:-

[p] 173. Having exhaustively discussed the constitutional and the
       statutory framework as regards the issue at hand we find it
       appropriate to direct the following:

[p] 174. The District Education Officer (DEO) is directed to conduct
       periodic inspections, preferably once in a year, of school
       infrastructure, particularly with regard to toilet and washing
       facilities, availability of menstrual absorbents, sanitary waste
       disposal   mechanisms     and      training/awareness   measures
       undertaken by the concerned school. Whilst conducting such
       periodic inspections, the DEO must mandatorily obtain
       anonymous feedback in the form of a tailored survey from the
       students themselves and ensure that any further action taken
       pursuant to such a periodic inspection gives due regard to the
       responses received from such a survey.

[p] 176. The National Commission for Protection of Child Rights
       (NCPCR), or, as the case may be, the State Commission for
       Protection of Child Rights (SCPCR), is requested to oversee the
       implementation of the aforesaid directions. In case of non-
       compliance, the NCPCR and SCPCR shall take necessary steps
       as provided underSections 15and24of the Commissions forProtection of Child Rights Act, 2005, respectively.Section 15of
       the said Act vests the Commissions with the power to
       recommend that the concerned Government or authority take
       appropriate action. Thus, the powers of the DEO and the
       concerned Commission are not overlapping.

[p] 177. We do not say for a moment that the steps taken by the States
       at present be discontinued in view of the aforesaid directions.
       These directions, along with the Union’s Menstrual Hygiene
       Policy for School Girls, shall operate as mandatory standards inW.P. (C) No. 1000 of 2022                              Page 124 of 126addition to the steps being taken by the States through its
       policies, schemes, programmes etc.

[p] 178. Considering the nature of the case, the Union will have to satisfy
       us on substantial compliance. In this regard, we, therefore,
       issue a continuing mandamus. The Union shall also ensure
       upon the compliance of our directions and guidelines in all
       States. It will be for the Union to also apprise us on the
       compliance by all the States.

[p] 179. The Union of India and all the States and Union Territories
       respectively shall ensure that the aforesaid directions are strictly
       complied with within a period of three months from the date of
       the pronouncement of this judgment.

[p] 181. The Registry shall forward one copy each of this judgment to the
       following:-

[p] 182. We treat this matter as part heard. The Registry shall notify this
       matter after three months alongwith the compliance report on
       behalf of the States and Union Territories before this very Bench.

[p] …………………………..J.
                                                  (J.B. PARDIWALA)




                                               .…………………………..J.
                                                   (R. MAHADEVAN)



     New Delhi;

[p] 30th January, 2026W.P. (C) No. 1000 of 2022                               Page 126 of 126

[blockquote] “2. Building
             All-weather building consisting of—

[blockquote] (i) at least one class-room for every teacher and an
             office-cum-store-cum-Head teacher’s room;

[blockquote] (ii) barrier-free access;

[blockquote] (iii) separate toilets for boys and girls;

[blockquote] (iv) safe and adequate drinking water facility to all
             children;

[blockquote] (v) a kitchen where mid-day meal is cooked in the
             school;

[blockquote] (vi) Playground;

[blockquote] (vii) arrangements for securing the school building by
             boundary wall or fencing.”
                                                     (Emphasis is ours)

[blockquote] a.   The right to education has been termed as a ‘multiplier
              right’ as it enables exercise of other human rights. The
              right to education forms part of the broader framework of
              the right to life and human dignity, which cannot be
              realized without access to education.

[blockquote] b.   The substantive approach to equality underArticle 14demands that treatment be accorded with due regard to
              the individual, institutional, systemic, and contextual
              barriers that impede the translation of rights in reality. At
              the same time, the State, as a benefactor, is under an
              obligation to remedy such structural disadvantages.

[blockquote] c.   Inaccessibility   of   menstrual    hygiene    management
              measures undermines the dignity of a girl child, as dignity
              finds expression in conditions that enable individuals to
              live without humiliation, exclusion, or avoidable suffering.
              Privacy is inextricably linked with dignity. As a corollary,
              the right to privacy entails a duty on the State to not only
              refrain from violating privacy but an accompanyingW.P. (C) No. 1000 of 2022                                Page 118 of 126obligation on the State to take necessary measures to
              protect the privacy of an individual.

[blockquote] d.   The right to life underArticle 21of the Constitution
              includes the right to menstrual health. Access to safe,
              effective, and affordable menstrual hygiene management
              measures helps a girl child attain the highest standard of
              sexual and reproductive health. The right to healthy
              reproductive life embraces the right to access education
              and information about sexual health.

[blockquote] e.   The right to equality is expressed through the right to
              participate on equal terms. At the same time, equality of
              opportunity necessitates that everyone has a fair chance
              to acquire the skills necessary to access benefits.
              Inaccessibility   of   menstrual    hygiene    management
              measures strips away the right to participate on equal
              terms in school. The domino effect of the absence of
              education is the inability to participate in all walks of life
              later.

[blockquote] f.   The fundamental right to education under Article 21A and
              the RTE Actcomprises free, compulsory, and quality
              education. Free education includes all kinds of charges or
              expenses that would prevent a child from pursuing and
              completing elementary education.

[blockquote] g.     All schools, whether run by the appropriate Government
                   or privately managed, must act in accordance with the
                   norms and standardslaid down inSection 19. In case of
                   a school not established, owned, or controlled by the
                   appropriate Government or the local authority is found to
                   be in contravention of the provisions of theRTE Act, it
                   would be de-recognized and the consequences therefrom
                   would follow. Insofar as a school established, owned, or
                   controlled by the appropriate Government or the local
                   authority is found to be in contravention of the provisions
                   of theRTE Act, the State would be held accountable.

[blockquote] VII. DIRECTIONS

[blockquote] I.        As regards the “toilet and washing facilities”, we direct
                 that:-

[blockquote] i. All States and Union Territories shall ensure that every
                    school, whether Government-run or privately managed,
                    in both urban and rural areas, is provided with the
                    functional, gender-segregated toilets with usable water
                    connectivity.

[blockquote] ii. All the existing and newly constructed toilets in schools
                    shall be designed, constructed, and maintained so as toW.P. (C) No. 1000 of 2022                                    Page 120 of 126ensure privacy and accessibility, including by catering
                to the needs of children with disabilities.

[blockquote] iii. All school toilets shall be equipped with functional hand-
                washing facilities, with soap and water available at all
                times.

[blockquote] II.   As regards the “availability of menstrual absorbents”, we
             direct that:-

[blockquote] i. All States and Union Territories shall ensure that every
                school, whether Government-run or privately managed,
                in   both     urban   and    rural   areas,    provides   oxo-
                biodegradable     sanitary    napkins    manufactured       in
                compliance with the ASTM D-6954 standards free of cost.
                Such sanitary napkins shall be made readily accessible
                to girl students, preferably within the toilet premises
                through sanitary napkin vending machines, or, where
                such installation is not immediately feasible, at a
                designated place or with a designated authority within
                the school.

[blockquote] ii. All States and Union Territories shall ensure that every
                school, whether Government-run or privately managed,
                in both urban and rural areas, establish Menstrual
                Hygiene      Management      (MHM)   corners.    Such     MHM
                corners shall be equipped with, including but not limited
                to, spare innerwear, spare uniforms, disposable bags,W.P. (C) No. 1000 of 2022                                     Page 121 of 126and other necessary materials to address menstruation-

[blockquote] related exigencies.

[blockquote] III.   As regards the “disposal of sanitary waste”, we direct that:-

[blockquote] i. All States and Union Territories shall ensure that every
               school, whether Government-run or privately managed,
               in both urban and rural areas, is equipped with a safe,
               hygienic, and environmentally compliant mechanism for
               the disposal of sanitary napkins, in accordance with the
               latest Solid Waste Management Rules.

[blockquote] ii. Each toilet unit shall be equipped with a covered waste
               bin for the collection of sanitary material, and cleanliness
               and regular maintenance of such bins shall be ensured
               at all times.

[blockquote] IV.    As regards the “awareness and training about menstrual
             health and puberty”, we direct that:-

[blockquote] i. The National Council of Educational Research and
               Training (NCERT) and the State Council of Educational
               Research and Training (SCERT) shall incorporate gender-
               responsive      curricula,    more      particularly,      on
               menstruation,    puberty,    and   other   related      health
               concerns (PCOS, PCOD, etc.), with a view to break stigma
               and taboo associated with menstrual health and hygiene.

[blockquote] ii. All teachers, whether male or female, shall be adequately
               trained and sensitized on menstrual hygiene, includingW.P. (C) No. 1000 of 2022                                 Page 122 of 126appropriate    ways    of     supporting   and    assisting
              menstruating students.

[blockquote] iii. Information regarding the availability of Jan Aushadhi
              Suvidha Oxo-Biodegradable Sanitary Napkin shall be
              widely disseminated through advertisement in social
              media,    print   media,      radio   advertisement,    TV
              advertisement, cinema advertisement, and outdoor
              publicity like bus queue shelter branding, bus branding,
              auto wrapping, wall paintings.

[blockquote] iv. The child helpline set up by the National Commission for
              Protection of Child Rights in furtherance of Rule 26 of the
              RTE Rules be disseminated forthwith through social
              media,    print   media,      radio   advertisement,    TV
              advertisement, cinema advertisement, etc.

[blockquote] i. All the High Courts;

[blockquote] ii. All State Governments/Union Territories through Secretary,
          Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Government of India;
       iii. Secretary, Ministry of Education, Government of India;
       iv. Secretary, Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation,
          Government of India;

[blockquote] v. Secretary, Ministry of Women and Child Development,
          Government of India.

